Zarathustra is my brothers most personal work it is the history ofhis most individual experiences of his friendships ideals rapturesbitterest disappointments and sorrows. Above it all however theresoars transfiguring it the image of his greatest hopes and remotestaims. My brother had the figure of Zarathustra in his mind from his veryearliest youth he once told me that even as a child he had dreamt ofhim. At different periods in his life he would call this haunter of hisdreams by different names but in the end he declares in a note onthe subject I had to do a PERSIAN the honour of identifying him withthis creature of my fancy. Persians were the first to take a broad andcomprehensive view of history. Every series of evolutions accordingto them was presided over by a prophet and every prophet had hisHazarhis dynasty of a thousand years.All Zarathustras views as also his personality were early conceptionsof my brothers mind. Whoever reads his posthumously published writingsfor the years with care will constantly meet with passagessuggestive of Zarathustras thoughts and doctrines. For instance theideal of the Superman is put forth quite clearly in all his writingsduring the years and in We Philologists the followingremarkable observations occurHow can one praise and glorify a nation as a wholeEven among theGreeks it was the INDIVIDUALS that counted.The Greeks are interesting and extremely important because they rearedsuch a vast number of great individuals. How was this possible Thequestion is one which ought to be studied.I am interested only in the relations of a people to the rearing ofthe individual man and among the Greeks the conditions were unusuallyfavourable for the development of the individual not by any means owingto the goodness of the people but because of the struggles of theirevil instincts.WITH THE HELP OF FAVOURABLE MEASURES GREAT INDIVIDUALS MIGHT BE REAREDWHO WOULD BE BOTH DIFFERENT FROM AND HIGHER THAN THOSE WHO HERETOFOREHAVE OWED THEIR EXISTENCE TO MERE CHANCE. Here we may still be hopefulin the rearing of exceptional men.The notion of rearing the Superman is only a new form of an idealNietzsche already had in his youth that THE OBJECT OF MANKIND SHOULDLIE IN ITS HIGHEST INDIVIDUALS or as he writes in Schopenhauer asEducator Mankind ought constantly to be striving to produce greatmenthis and nothing else is its duty. But the ideals he most reveredin those days are no longer held to be the highest types of men. Noaround this future ideal of a coming humanitythe Supermanthe poetspread the veil of becoming. Who can tell to what glorious heights mancan still ascend That is why after having tested the worth of ournoblest idealthat of the Saviour in the light of the new valuationsthe poet cries with passionate emphasis in ZarathustraNever yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of themthe greatest and the smallest manAlltoosimilar are they still to each other. Verily even the greatestfound IalltoohumanThe phrase the rearing of the Superman has very often beenmisunderstood. By the word rearing in this case is meant the act ofmodifying by means of new and higher valuesvalues which as laws andguides of conduct and opinion are now to rule over mankind. In generalthe doctrine of the Superman can only be understood correctly inconjunction with other ideas of the authors such asthe Orderof Rank the Will to Power and the Transvaluation of all Values. Heassumes that Christianity as a product of the resentment of the botchedand the weak has put in ban all that is beautiful strong proud andpowerful in fact all the qualities resulting from strength and thatin consequence all forces which tend to promote or elevate life havebeen seriously undermined. Now however a new table of valuationsmust be placed over mankindnamely that of the strong mighty andmagnificent man overflowing with life and elevated to his zeniththeSuperman who is now put before us with overpowering passion as theaim of our life hope and will. And just as the old system of valuingwhich only extolled the qualities favourable to the weak the sufferingand the oppressed has succeeded in producing a weak suffering andmodern race so this new and reversed system of valuing ought to reara healthy strong lively and courageous type which would be a gloryto life itself. Stated briefly the leading principle of this new systemof valuing would be All that proceeds from power is good all thatsprings from weakness is bad.This type must not be regarded as a fanciful figure it is not anebulous hope which is to be realised at some indefinitely remoteperiod thousands of years hence nor is it a new species in theDarwinian sense of which we can know nothing and which it wouldtherefore be somewhat absurd to strive after. But it is meant to bea possibility which men of the present could realise with all theirspiritual and physical energies provided they adopted the new values.The author of Zarathustra never lost sight of that egregious exampleof a transvaluation of all values through Christianity whereby thewhole of the deified mode of life and thought of the Greeks as well asstrong Romedom was almost annihilated or transvalued in a comparativelyshort time. Could not a rejuvenated GraecoRoman system of valuing onceit had been refined and made more profound by the schooling whichtwo thousand years of Christianity had provided effect another suchrevolution within a calculable period of time until that glorious typeof manhood shall finally appear which is to be our new faith and hopeand in the creation of which Zarathustra exhorts us to participateIn his private notes on the subject the author uses the expressionSuperman always in the singular bythebye as signifying the mostthoroughly wellconstituted type as opposed to modern man aboveall however he designates Zarathustra himself as an example of theSuperman. In Ecco Homo he is careful to enlighten us concerning theprecursors and prerequisites to the advent of this highest type inreferring to a certain passage in the Gay ScienceIn order to understand this type we must first be quite clear inregard to the leading physiological condition on which it depends thiscondition is what I call GREAT HEALTHINESS. I know not how to express mymeaning more plainly or more personally than I have done already inone of the last chapters Aphorism of the fifth book of the GayaScienza.We the new the nameless the hardtounderstandit saystherewe firstlings of a yet untried futurewe require for a new endalso a new means namely a new healthiness stronger sharper tougherbolder and merrier than all healthiness hitherto. He whose soullongeth to experience the whole range of hitherto recognised valuesand desirabilities and to circumnavigate all the coasts of this idealMediterranean Sea who from the adventures of his most personalexperience wants to know how it feels to be a conqueror and discovererof the idealas likewise how it is with the artist the saint thelegislator the sage the scholar the devotee the prophet and thegodly nonconformist of the old stylerequires one thing above allfor that purpose GREAT HEALTHINESSsuch healthiness as one not onlypossesses but also constantly acquires and must acquire because oneunceasingly sacrifices it again and must sacrifice itAnd now afterhaving been long on the way in this fashion we Argonauts of the idealmore courageous perhaps than prudent and often enough shipwreckedand brought to grief nevertheless dangerously healthy always healthyagainit would seem as if in recompense for it all that we have astill undiscovered country before us the boundaries of which no onehas yet seen a beyond to all countries and corners of the ideal knownhitherto a world so overrich in the beautiful the strange thequestionable the frightful and the divine that our curiosity as wellas our thirst for possession thereof have got out of handalas thatnothing will now any longer satisfy usHow could we still be content with THE MAN OF THE PRESENT DAYafter such outlooks and with such a craving in our conscience andconsciousness Sad enough but it is unavoidable that we should lookon the worthiest aims and hopes of the man of the presentday withillconcealed amusement and perhaps should no longer look at them.Another ideal runs on before us a strange tempting ideal full ofdanger to which we should not like to persuade any one because wedo not so readily acknowledge any ones RIGHT THERETO the ideal ofa spirit who plays naively that is to say involuntarily and fromoverflowing abundance and power with everything that has hithertobeen called holy good intangible or divine to whom the loftiestconception which the people have reasonably made their measure of valuewould already practically imply danger ruin abasement or at leastrelaxation blindness or temporary selfforgetfulness the ideal ofa humanly superhuman welfare and benevolence which will often enoughappear INHUMAN for example when put alongside of all past seriousnesson earth and alongside of all past solemnities in bearing word tonelook morality and pursuit as their truest involuntary parodyandWITH which nevertheless perhaps THE GREAT SERIOUSNESS only commenceswhen the proper interrogative mark is set up the fate of the soulchanges the hourhand moves and tragedy begins...Although the figure of Zarathustra and a large number of the leadingthoughts in this work had appeared much earlier in the dreams andwritings of the author Thus Spake Zarathustra did not actually comeinto being until the month of August in Sils Maria and it was theidea of the Eternal Recurrence of all things which finally induced mybrother to set forth his new views in poetic language. In regard to hisfirst conception of this idea his autobiographical sketch Ecce Homowritten in the autumn of contains the following passageThe fundamental idea of my worknamely the Eternal Recurrence ofall thingsthis highest of all possible formulae of a Yeasayingphilosophy first occurred to me in August . I made a note of thethought on a sheet of paper with the postscript feet beyondmen and time That day I happened to be wandering through the woodsalongside of the lake of Silvaplana and I halted beside a hugepyramidal and towering rock not far from Surlei. It was then that thethought struck me. Looking back now I find that exactly two monthsprevious to this inspiration I had had an omen of its coming in theform of a sudden and decisive alteration in my tastesmore particularlyin music. It would even be possible to consider all Zarathustra as amusical composition. At all events a very necessary condition in itsproduction was a renaissance in myself of the art of hearing. In a smallmountain resort Recoaro near Vicenza where I spent the spring of I and my friend and Maestro Peter Gastalso one who had beenborn againdiscovered that the phoenix music that hovered over us worelighter and brighter plumes than it had done theretofore.During the month of August my brother resolved to reveal theteaching of the Eternal Recurrence in dithyrambic and psalmodic formthrough the mouth of Zarathustra. Among the notes of this period wefound a page on which is written the first definite plan of Thus SpakeZarathustraMIDDAY AND ETERNITY.GUIDEPOSTS TO A NEW WAY OF LIVING.Beneath this is writtenZarathustra born on lake Urmi left his home in his thirtieth yearwent into the province of Aria and during ten years of solitude in themountains composed the ZendAvesta.The sun of knowledge stands once more at midday and the serpentof eternity lies coiled in its light It is YOUR time ye middaybrethren.In that summer of my brother after many years of steadilydeclining health began at last to rally and it is to this first gushof the recovery of his once splendid bodily condition that we owe notonly The Gay Science which in its mood may be regarded as a preludeto Zarathustra but also Zarathustra itself. Just as he wasbeginning to recuperate his health however an unkind destiny broughthim a number of most painful personal experiences. His friends causedhim many disappointments which were the more bitter to him inasmuch ashe regarded friendship as such a sacred institution and for the firsttime in his life he realised the whole horror of that loneliness towhich perhaps all greatness is condemned. But to be forsaken issomething very different from deliberately choosing blessed loneliness.How he longed in those days for the ideal friend who would thoroughlyunderstand him to whom he would be able to say all and whom heimagined he had found at various periods in his life from his earliestyouth onwards. Now however that the way he had chosen grew ever moreperilous and steep he found nobody who could follow him he thereforecreated a perfect friend for himself in the ideal form of a majesticphilosopher and made this creation the preacher of his gospel to theworld.Whether my brother would ever have written Thus Spake Zarathustra according to the first plan sketched in the summer of if hehad not had the disappointments already referred to is now an idlequestion but perhaps where Zarathustra is concerned we may also saywith Master Eckhardt The fleetest beast to bear you to perfection issuffering.My brother writes as follows about the origin of the first part ofZarathustraIn the winter of I was living on the charminglittle Gulf of Rapallo not far from Genoa and between Chiavari andCape Porto Fino. My health was not very good the winter was cold andexceptionally rainy and the small inn in which I lived was so closeto the water that at night my sleep would be disturbed if the sea werehigh. These circumstances were surely the very reverse of favourableand yet in spite of it all and as if in demonstration of my belief thateverything decisive comes to life in spite of every obstacle it wasprecisely during this winter and in the midst of these unfavourablecircumstances that my Zarathustra originated. In the morning I used tostart out in a southerly direction up the glorious road to Zoagli whichrises aloft through a forest of pines and gives one a view far out intothe sea. In the afternoon as often as my health permitted I walkedround the whole bay from Santa Margherita to beyond Porto Fino. Thisspot was all the more interesting to me inasmuch as it was so dearlyloved by the Emperor Frederick III. In the autumn of I chanced tobe there again when he was revisiting this small forgotten worldof happiness for the last time. It was on these two roads that allZarathustra came to me above all Zarathustra himself as a typeIought rather to say that it was on these walks that these ideas waylaidme.The first part of Zarathustra was written in about ten daysthat isto say from the beginning to about the middle of February . Thelast lines were written precisely in the hallowed hour when RichardWagner gave up the ghost in Venice.With the exception of the ten days occupied in composing the first partof this book my brother often referred to this winter as the hardestand sickliest he had ever experienced. He did not however mean therebythat his former disorders were troubling him but that he was sufferingfrom a severe attack of influenza which he had caught in SantaMargherita and which tormented him for several weeks after his arrivalin Genoa. As a matter of fact however what he complained of most washis spiritual conditionthat indescribable forsakennessto which hegives such heartrending expression in Zarathustra. Even the receptionwhich the first part met with at the hands of friends and acquaintanceswas extremely disheartening for almost all those to whom he presentedcopies of the work misunderstood it. I found no one ripe for many of mythoughts the case of Zarathustra proves that one can speak with theutmost clearness and yet not be heard by any one. My brother was verymuch discouraged by the feebleness of the response he was given and ashe was striving just then to give up the practice of taking hydrateof chlorala drug he had begun to take while ill with influenzathefollowing spring spent in Rome was a somewhat gloomy one for him.He writes about it as followsI spent a melancholy spring in Romewhere I only just managed to liveand this was no easy matter. Thiscity which is absolutely unsuited to the poetauthor of Zarathustraand for the choice of which I was not responsible made me inordinatelymiserable. I tried to leave it. I wanted to go to Aquilathe oppositeof Rome in every respect and actually founded in a spirit of enmitytowards that city just as I also shall found a city some day as amemento of an atheist and genuine enemy of the Churcha person veryclosely related to methe great Hohenstaufen the Emperor FrederickII. But Fate lay behind it all I had to return again to Rome. In theend I was obliged to be satisfied with the Piazza Barberini after I hadexerted myself in vain to find an antiChristian quarter. I fear thaton one occasion to avoid bad smells as much as possible I actuallyinquired at the Palazzo del Quirinale whether they could not provide aquiet room for a philosopher. In a chamber high above the Piazza justmentioned from which one obtained a general view of Rome and couldhear the fountains plashing far below the loneliest of all songswas composedThe NightSong. About this time I was obsessed by anunspeakably sad melody the refrain of which I recognised in the wordsdead through immortality.We remained somewhat too long in Rome that spring and what with theeffect of the increasing heat and the discouraging circumstances alreadydescribed my brother resolved not to write any more or in any casenot to proceed with Zarathustra although I offered to relieve himof all trouble in connection with the proofs and the publisher. Whenhowever we returned to Switzerland towards the end of June and hefound himself once more in the familiar and exhilarating air of themountains all his joyous creative powers revived and in a note to meannouncing the dispatch of some manuscript he wrote as follows I haveengaged a place here for three months forsooth I am the greatest foolto allow my courage to be sapped from me by the climate of Italy. Nowand again I am troubled by the thought WHAT NEXT My future is thedarkest thing in the world to me but as there still remains a greatdeal for me to do I suppose I ought rather to think of doing this thanof my future and leave the rest to THEE and the gods.The second part of Zarathustra was written between the th of Juneand the th July. This summer finding myself once more in the sacredplace where the first thought of Zarathustra flashed across my mindI conceived the second part. Ten days sufficed. Neither for the secondthe first nor the third part have I required a day longer.He often used to speak of the ecstatic mood in which he wroteZarathustra how in his walks over hill and dale the ideas would crowdinto his mind and how he would note them down hastily in a notebookfrom which he would transcribe them on his return sometimes workingtill midnight. He says in a letter to me You can have no idea of thevehemence of such composition and in Ecce Homo autumn hedescribes as follows with passionate enthusiasm the incomparable mood inwhich he created ZarathustraHas any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notionof what poets of a stronger age understood by the word inspiration Ifnot I will describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of superstitionin one it would hardly be possible to set aside completely the ideathat one is the mere incarnation mouthpiece or medium of an almightypower. The idea of revelation in the sense that something becomessuddenly visible and audible with indescribable certainty and accuracywhich profoundly convulses and upsets onedescribes simply the matterof fact. One hearsone does not seek one takesone does not askwho gives a thought suddenly flashes up like lightning it comes withnecessity unhesitatinglyI have never had any choice in the matter.There is an ecstasy such that the immense strain of it is sometimesrelaxed by a flood of tears along with which ones steps either rushor involuntarily lag alternately. There is the feeling that one iscompletely out of hand with the very distinct consciousness of anendless number of fine thrills and quiverings to the very toesthereis a depth of happiness in which the painfullest and gloomiest do notoperate as antitheses but as conditioned as demanded in the sense ofnecessary shades of colour in such an overflow of light. There is aninstinct for rhythmic relations which embraces wide areas of formslength the need of a wideembracing rhythm is almost the measure ofthe force of an inspiration a sort of counterpart to its pressure andtension. Everything happens quite involuntarily as if in a tempestuousoutburst of freedom of absoluteness of power and divinity. Theinvoluntariness of the figures and similes is the most remarkablething one loses all perception of what constitutes the figure andwhat constitutes the simile everything seems to present itself asthe readiest the correctest and the simplest means of expression.It actually seems to use one of Zarathustras own phrases as if allthings came unto one and would fain be similes Here do all thingscome caressingly to thy talk and flatter thee for they want to rideupon thy back. On every simile dost thou here ride to every truth. Herefly open unto thee all beings words and wordcabinets here all beingwanteth to become words here all becoming wanteth to learn of thee howto talk. This is MY experience of inspiration. I do not doubt but thatone would have to go back thousands of years in order to find some onewho could say to me It is mine alsoIn the autumn of my brother left the Engadine for Germany andstayed there a few weeks. In the following winter after wanderingsomewhat erratically through Stresa Genoa and Spezia he landed inNice where the climate so happily promoted his creative powers thathe wrote the third part of Zarathustra. In the winter beneath thehalcyon sky of Nice which then looked down upon me for the first timein my life I found the third Zarathustraand came to the end of mytask the whole having occupied me scarcely a year. Many hidden cornersand heights in the landscapes round about Nice are hallowed to me byunforgettable moments. That decisive chapter entitled Old and NewTables was composed in the very difficult ascent from the stationto Ezathat wonderful Moorish village in the rocks. My most creativemoments were always accompanied by unusual muscular activity. The bodyis inspired let us waive the question of the soul. I might often havebeen seen dancing in those days. Without a suggestion of fatigue I couldthen walk for seven or eight hours on end among the hills. I slept welland laughed wellI was perfectly robust and patient.As we have seen each of the three parts of Zarathustra was writtenafter a more or less short period of preparation in about ten days.The composition of the fourth part alone was broken by occasionalinterruptions. The first notes relating to this part were written whilehe and I were staying together in Zurich in September . In thefollowing November while staying at Mentone he began to elaboratethese notes and after a long pause finished the manuscript at Nicebetween the end of January and the middle of February . My brotherthen called this part the fourth and last but even before and shortlyafter it had been privately printed he wrote to me saying that he stillintended writing a fifth and sixth part and notes relating to theseparts are now in my possession. This fourth part the original MS. ofwhich contains this note Only for my friends not for the publicis written in a particularly personal spirit and those few to whom hepresented a copy of it he pledged to the strictest secrecy concerningits contents. He often thought of making this fourth part public alsobut doubted whether he would ever be able to do so without considerablyaltering certain portions of it. At all events he resolved to distributethis manuscript production of which only forty copies were printedonly among those who had proved themselves worthy of it and it speakseloquently of his utter loneliness and need of sympathy in those daysthat he had occasion to present only seven copies of his book accordingto this resolution.Already at the beginning of this history I hinted at the reasons whichled my brother to select a Persian as the incarnation of his ideal ofthe majestic philosopher. His reasons however for choosing Zarathustraof all others to be his mouthpiece he gives us in the followingwordsPeople have never asked me as they should have done what thename Zarathustra precisely means in my mouth in the mouth of the firstImmoralist for what distinguishes that philosopher from all othersin the past is the very fact that he was exactly the reverse of animmoralist. Zarathustra was the first to see in the struggle betweengood and evil the essential wheel in the working of things. Thetranslation of morality into the metaphysical as force cause end initself was HIS work. But the very question suggests its own answer.Zarathustra CREATED the most portentous error MORALITY consequently heshould also be the first to PERCEIVE that error not only because hehas had longer and greater experience of the subject than any otherthinkerall history is the experimental refutation of the theory ofthe socalled moral order of thingsthe more important point is thatZarathustra was more truthful than any other thinker. In his teachingalone do we meet with truthfulness upheld as the highest virtuei.e.the reverse of the COWARDICE of the idealist who flees from reality.Zarathustra had more courage in his body than any other thinker beforeor after him. To tell the truth and TO AIM STRAIGHT that is the firstPersian virtue. Am I understood... The overcoming of morality throughitselfthrough truthfulness the overcoming of the moralist through hisoppositeTHROUGH ME that is what the name Zarathustra means in mymouth.ELIZABETH FORSTERNIETZSCHE.Nietzsche ArchivesWeimar December .THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA.FIRST PART. ZARATHUSTRAS DISCOURSES.ZARATHUSTRAS PROLOGUE..When Zarathustra was thirty years old he left his home and the lake ofhis home and went into the mountains. There he enjoyed his spirit andsolitude and for ten years did not weary of it. But at last his heartchangedand rising one morning with the rosy dawn he went before thesun and spake thus unto itThou great star What would be thy happiness if thou hadst not those forwhom thou shinestFor ten years hast thou climbed hither unto my cave thou wouldst havewearied of thy light and of the journey had it not been for me mineeagle and my serpent.But we awaited thee every morning took from thee thine overflow andblessed thee for it.Lo I am weary of my wisdom like the bee that hath gathered too muchhoney I need hands outstretched to take it.I would fain bestow and distribute until the wise have once more becomejoyous in their folly and the poor happy in their riches.Therefore must I descend into the deep as thou doest in theevening when thou goest behind the sea and givest light also to thenetherworld thou exuberant starLike thee must I GO DOWN as men say to whom I shall descend.Bless me then thou tranquil eye that canst behold even the greatesthappiness without envyBless the cup that is about to overflow that the water may flow goldenout of it and carry everywhere the reflection of thy blissLo This cup is again going to empty itself and Zarathustra is againgoing to be a man.Thus began Zarathustras downgoing..Zarathustra went down the mountain alone no one meeting him. When heentered the forest however there suddenly stood before him an old manwho had left his holy cot to seek roots. And thus spake the old man toZarathustraNo stranger to me is this wanderer many years ago passed he by.Zarathustra he was called but he hath altered.Then thou carriedst thine ashes into the mountains wilt thou now carrythy fire into the valleys Fearest thou not the incendiarys doomYea I recognise Zarathustra. Pure is his eye and no loathing lurkethabout his mouth. Goeth he not along like a dancerAltered is Zarathustra a child hath Zarathustra become an awakened oneis Zarathustra what wilt thou do in the land of the sleepersAs in the sea hast thou lived in solitude and it hath borne thee up.Alas wilt thou now go ashore Alas wilt thou again drag thy bodythyselfZarathustra answered I love mankind.Why said the saint did I go into the forest and the desert Was itnot because I loved men far too wellNow I love God men I do not love. Man is a thing too imperfect for me.Love to man would be fatal to me.Zarathustra answered What spake I of love I am bringing gifts untomen.Give them nothing said the saint. Take rather part of their loadand carry it along with themthat will be most agreeable unto them ifonly it be agreeable unto theeIf however thou wilt give unto them give them no more than an almsand let them also beg for itNo replied Zarathustra I give no alms. I am not poor enough forthat.The saint laughed at Zarathustra and spake thus Then see to it thatthey accept thy treasures They are distrustful of anchorites and donot believe that we come with gifts.The fall of our footsteps ringeth too hollow through their streets. Andjust as at night when they are in bed and hear a man abroad long beforesunrise so they ask themselves concerning us Where goeth the thiefGo not to men but stay in the forest Go rather to the animals Why notbe like mea bear amongst bears a bird amongst birdsAnd what doeth the saint in the forest asked Zarathustra.The saint answered I make hymns and sing them and in making hymns Ilaugh and weep and mumble thus do I praise God.With singing weeping laughing and mumbling do I praise the God who ismy God. But what dost thou bring us as a giftWhen Zarathustra had heard these words he bowed to the saint and saidWhat should I have to give thee Let me rather hurry hence lest I takeaught away from theeAnd thus they parted from one another the oldman and Zarathustra laughing like schoolboys.When Zarathustra was alone however he said to his heart Could it bepossible This old saint in the forest hath not yet heard of it thatGOD IS DEAD.When Zarathustra arrived at the nearest town which adjoineth the foresthe found many people assembled in the marketplace for it had beenannounced that a ropedancer would give a performance. And Zarathustraspake thus unto the peopleI TEACH YOU THE SUPERMAN. Man is something that is to be surpassed. Whathave ye done to surpass manAll beings hitherto have created something beyond themselves and yewant to be the ebb of that great tide and would rather go back to thebeast than surpass manWhat is the ape to man A laughingstock a thing of shame. And just thesame shall man be to the Superman a laughingstock a thing of shame.Ye have made your way from the worm to man and much within you is stillworm. Once were ye apes and even yet man is more of an ape than any ofthe apes.Even the wisest among you is only a disharmony and hybrid of plant andphantom. But do I bid you become phantoms or plantsLo I teach you the SupermanThe Superman is the meaning of the earth. Let your will say TheSuperman SHALL BE the meaning of the earthI conjure you my brethren REMAIN TRUE TO THE EARTH and believe notthose who speak unto you of superearthly hopes Poisoners are theywhether they know it or not.Despisers of life are they decaying ones and poisoned ones themselvesof whom the earth is weary so away with themOnce blasphemy against God was the greatest blasphemy but God diedand therewith also those blasphemers. To blaspheme the earth is now thedreadfulest sin and to rate the heart of the unknowable higher than themeaning of the earthOnce the soul looked contemptuously on the body and then that contemptwas the supreme thingthe soul wished the body meagre ghastly andfamished. Thus it thought to escape from the body and the earth.Oh that soul was itself meagre ghastly and famished and cruelty wasthe delight of that soulBut ye also my brethren tell me What doth your body say aboutyour soul Is your soul not poverty and pollution and wretchedselfcomplacencyVerily a polluted stream is man. One must be a sea to receive apolluted stream without becoming impure.Lo I teach you the Superman he is that sea in him can your greatcontempt be submerged.What is the greatest thing ye can experience It is the hour of greatcontempt. The hour in which even your happiness becometh loathsome untoyou and so also your reason and virtue.The hour when ye say What good is my happiness It is poverty andpollution and wretched selfcomplacency. But my happiness should justifyexistence itselfThe hour when ye say What good is my reason Doth it long forknowledge as the lion for his food It is poverty and pollution andwretched selfcomplacencyThe hour when ye say What good is my virtue As yet it hath not mademe passionate. How weary I am of my good and my bad It is all povertyand pollution and wretched selfcomplacencyThe hour when ye say What good is my justice I do not see that I amfervour and fuel. The just however are fervour and fuelThe hour when ye say What good is my pity Is not pity the cross onwhich he is nailed who loveth man But my pity is not a crucifixion.Have ye ever spoken thus Have ye ever cried thus Ah would that I hadheard you crying thusIt is not your sinit is your selfsatisfaction that crieth untoheaven your very sparingness in sin crieth unto heavenWhere is the lightning to lick you with its tongue Where is the frenzywith which ye should be inoculatedLo I teach you the Superman he is that lightning he is that frenzyWhen Zarathustra had thus spoken one of the people called out We havenow heard enough of the ropedancer it is time now for us to see him And all the people laughed at Zarathustra. But the ropedancer whothought the words applied to him began his performance..Zarathustra however looked at the people and wondered. Then he spakethusMan is a rope stretched between the animal and the Supermana rope overan abyss.A dangerous crossing a dangerous wayfaring a dangerous lookingback adangerous trembling and halting.What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal what islovable in man is that he is an OVERGOING and a DOWNGOING.I love those that know not how to live except as downgoers for theyare the overgoers.I love the great despisers because they are the great adorers andarrows of longing for the other shore.I love those who do not first seek a reason beyond the stars for goingdown and being sacrifices but sacrifice themselves to the earth thatthe earth of the Superman may hereafter arrive.I love him who liveth in order to know and seeketh to know inorder that the Superman may hereafter live. Thus seeketh he his owndowngoing.I love him who laboureth and inventeth that he may build the house forthe Superman and prepare for him earth animal and plant for thusseeketh he his own downgoing.I love him who loveth his virtue for virtue is the will to downgoingand an arrow of longing.I love him who reserveth no share of spirit for himself but wanteth tobe wholly the spirit of his virtue thus walketh he as spirit over thebridge.I love him who maketh his virtue his inclination and destiny thus forthe sake of his virtue he is willing to live on or live no more.I love him who desireth not too many virtues. One virtue is more of avirtue than two because it is more of a knot for ones destiny to clingto.I love him whose soul is lavish who wanteth no thanks and doth not giveback for he always bestoweth and desireth not to keep for himself.I love him who is ashamed when the dice fall in his favour and who thenasketh Am I a dishonest playerfor he is willing to succumb.I love him who scattereth golden words in advance of his deeds andalways doeth more than he promiseth for he seeketh his own downgoing.I love him who justifieth the future ones and redeemeth the past onesfor he is willing to succumb through the present ones.I love him who chasteneth his God because he loveth his God for hemust succumb through the wrath of his God.I love him whose soul is deep even in the wounding and may succumbthrough a small matter thus goeth he willingly over the bridge.I love him whose soul is so overfull that he forgetteth himself and allthings are in him thus all things become his downgoing.I love him who is of a free spirit and a free heart thus is hishead only the bowels of his heart his heart however causeth hisdowngoing.I love all who are like heavy drops falling one by one out of the darkcloud that lowereth over man they herald the coming of the lightningand succumb as heralds.Lo I am a herald of the lightning and a heavy drop out of the cloudthe lightning however is the SUPERMAN..When Zarathustra had spoken these words he again looked at the peopleand was silent. There they stand said he to his heart there theylaugh they understand me not I am not the mouth for these ears.Must one first batter their ears that they may learn to hear with theireyes Must one clatter like kettledrums and penitential preachers Or dothey only believe the stammererThey have something whereof they are proud. What do they call it thatwhich maketh them proud Culture they call it it distinguisheth themfrom the goatherds.They dislike therefore to hear of contempt of themselves. So I willappeal to their pride.I will speak unto them of the most contemptible thing that however isTHE LAST MANAnd thus spake Zarathustra unto the peopleIt is time for man to fix his goal. It is time for man to plant the germof his highest hope.Still is his soil rich enough for it. But that soil will one day bepoor and exhausted and no lofty tree will any longer be able to growthereon.Alas there cometh the time when man will no longer launch the arrow ofhis longing beyond manand the string of his bow will have unlearned towhizzI tell you one must still have chaos in one to give birth to a dancingstar. I tell you ye have still chaos in you.Alas There cometh the time when man will no longer give birth to anystar. Alas There cometh the time of the most despicable man who can nolonger despise himself.Lo I show you THE LAST MAN.What is love What is creation What is longing What is a starsoasketh the last man and blinketh.The earth hath then become small and on it there hoppeth the last manwho maketh everything small. His species is ineradicable like that ofthe groundflea the last man liveth longest.We have discovered happinesssay the last men and blink thereby.They have left the regions where it is hard to live for they needwarmth. One still loveth ones neighbour and rubbeth against him forone needeth warmth.Turning ill and being distrustful they consider sinful they walkwarily. He is a fool who still stumbleth over stones or menA little poison now and then that maketh pleasant dreams. And muchpoison at last for a pleasant death.One still worketh for work is a pastime. But one is careful lest thepastime should hurt one.One no longer becometh poor or rich both are too burdensome. Who stillwanteth to rule Who still wanteth to obey Both are too burdensome.No shepherd and one herd Every one wanteth the same every one isequal he who hath other sentiments goeth voluntarily into the madhouse.Formerly all the world was insanesay the subtlest of them andblink thereby.They are clever and know all that hath happened so there isno end to their raillery. People still fall out but are soonreconciledotherwise it spoileth their stomachs.They have their little pleasures for the day and their little pleasuresfor the night but they have a regard for health.We have discovered happinesssay the last men and blink thereby.And here ended the first discourse of Zarathustra which is alsocalled The Prologue for at this point the shouting and mirth of themultitude interrupted him. Give us this last man O Zarathustratheycalled outmake us into these last men Then will we make thee apresent of the Superman And all the people exulted and smacked theirlips. Zarathustra however turned sad and said to his heartThey understand me not I am not the mouth for these ears.Too long perhaps have I lived in the mountains too much have Ihearkened unto the brooks and trees now do I speak unto them as untothe goatherds.Calm is my soul and clear like the mountains in the morning. But theythink me cold and a mocker with terrible jests.And now do they look at me and laugh and while they laugh they hate metoo. There is ice in their laughter..Then however something happened which made every mouth mute and everyeye fixed. In the meantime of course the ropedancer had commenced hisperformance he had come out at a little door and was going along therope which was stretched between two towers so that it hung above themarketplace and the people. When he was just midway across the littledoor opened once more and a gaudilydressed fellow like a buffoonsprang out and went rapidly after the first one. Go on haltfoot cried his frightful voice go on lazybones interlopersallowfacelest I tickle thee with my heel What dost thou herebetween the towers In the tower is the place for thee thou shouldst belocked up to one better than thyself thou blockest the wayAnd withevery word he came nearer and nearer the first one. When however hewas but a step behind there happened the frightful thing which madeevery mouth mute and every eye fixedhe uttered a yell like a deviland jumped over the other who was in his way. The latter however whenhe thus saw his rival triumph lost at the same time his head and hisfooting on the rope he threw his pole away and shot downwards fasterthan it like an eddy of arms and legs into the depth. The marketplaceand the people were like the sea when the storm cometh on they all flewapart and in disorder especially where the body was about to fall.Zarathustra however remained standing and just beside him fell thebody badly injured and disfigured but not yet dead. After a whileconsciousness returned to the shattered man and he saw Zarathustrakneeling beside him. What art thou doing there said he at last Iknew long ago that the devil would trip me up. Now he draggeth me tohell wilt thou prevent himOn mine honour my friend answered Zarathustra there is nothing ofall that whereof thou speakest there is no devil and no hell. Thy soulwill be dead even sooner than thy body fear therefore nothing anymoreThe man looked up distrustfully. If thou speakest the truth said heI lose nothing when I lose my life. I am not much more than an animalwhich hath been taught to dance by blows and scanty fare.Not at all said Zarathustra thou hast made danger thy callingtherein there is nothing contemptible. Now thou perishest by thycalling therefore will I bury thee with mine own hands.When Zarathustra had said this the dying one did not reply further buthe moved his hand as if he sought the hand of Zarathustra in gratitude..Meanwhile the evening came on and the marketplace veiled itself ingloom. Then the people dispersed for even curiosity and terror becomefatigued. Zarathustra however still sat beside the dead man on theground absorbed in thought so he forgot the time. But at last itbecame night and a cold wind blew upon the lonely one. Then aroseZarathustra and said to his heartVerily a fine catch of fish hath Zarathustra made today It is not aman he hath caught but a corpse.Sombre is human life and as yet without meaning a buffoon may befateful to it.I want to teach men the sense of their existence which is the Supermanthe lightning out of the dark cloudman.But still am I far from them and my sense speaketh not unto theirsense. To men I am still something between a fool and a corpse.Gloomy is the night gloomy are the ways of Zarathustra. Come thou coldand stiff companion I carry thee to the place where I shall bury theewith mine own hands..When Zarathustra had said this to his heart he put the corpse upon hisshoulders and set out on his way. Yet had he not gone a hundred stepswhen there stole a man up to him and whispered in his earand lohe that spake was the buffoon from the tower. Leave this town OZarathustra said he there are too many here who hate thee. Thegood and just hate thee and call thee their enemy and despiser thebelievers in the orthodox belief hate thee and call thee a danger tothe multitude. It was thy good fortune to be laughed at and verily thouspakest like a buffoon. It was thy good fortune to associate with thedead dog by so humiliating thyself thou hast saved thy life today.Depart however from this townor tomorrow I shall jump over theea living man over a dead one. And when he had said this the buffoonvanished Zarathustra however went on through the dark streets.At the gate of the town the gravediggers met him they shone theirtorch on his face and recognising Zarathustra they sorely deridedhim. Zarathustra is carrying away the dead dog a fine thing thatZarathustra hath turned a gravedigger For our hands are too cleanlyfor that roast. Will Zarathustra steal the bite from the devil Wellthen good luck to the repast If only the devil is not a better thiefthan Zarathustrahe will steal them both he will eat them both Andthey laughed among themselves and put their heads together.Zarathustra made no answer thereto but went on his way. When he hadgone on for two hours past forests and swamps he had heard too much ofthe hungry howling of the wolves and he himself became ahungry. So hehalted at a lonely house in which a light was burning.Hunger attacketh me said Zarathustra like a robber. Among forestsand swamps my hunger attacketh me and late in the night.Strange humours hath my hunger. Often it cometh to me only after arepast and all day it hath failed to come where hath it beenAnd thereupon Zarathustra knocked at the door of the house. An old manappeared who carried a light and asked Who cometh unto me and my badsleepA living man and a dead one said Zarathustra. Give me something toeat and drink I forgot it during the day. He that feedeth the hungryrefresheth his own soul saith wisdom.The old man withdrew but came back immediately and offered Zarathustrabread and wine. A bad country for the hungry said he that is whyI live here. Animal and man come unto me the anchorite. But bid thycompanion eat and drink also he is wearier than thou. Zarathustraanswered My companion is dead I shall hardly be able to persuade himto eat. That doth not concern me said the old man sullenly hethat knocketh at my door must take what I offer him. Eat and fare yewellThereafter Zarathustra again went on for two hours trusting to the pathand the light of the stars for he was an experienced nightwalker andliked to look into the face of all that slept. When the morning dawnedhowever Zarathustra found himself in a thick forest and no path wasany longer visible. He then put the dead man in a hollow tree at hisheadfor he wanted to protect him from the wolvesand laid himselfdown on the ground and moss. And immediately he fell asleep tired inbody but with a tranquil soul..Long slept Zarathustra and not only the rosy dawn passed over his headbut also the morning. At last however his eyes opened and amazedly hegazed into the forest and the stillness amazedly he gazed into himself.Then he arose quickly like a seafarer who all at once seeth the landand he shouted for joy for he saw a new truth. And he spake thus to hisheartA light hath dawned upon me I need companionsliving ones not deadcompanions and corpses which I carry with me where I will.But I need living companions who will follow me because they want tofollow themselvesand to the place where I will.A light hath dawned upon me. Not to the people is Zarathustra to speakbut to companions Zarathustra shall not be the herds herdsman andhoundTo allure many from the herdfor that purpose have I come. The peopleand the herd must be angry with me a robber shall Zarathustra be calledby the herdsmen.Herdsmen I say but they call themselves the good and just. Herdsmen Isay but they call themselves the believers in the orthodox belief.Behold the good and just Whom do they hate most Him who breaketh uptheir tables of values the breaker the lawbreakerhe however isthe creator.Behold the believers of all beliefs Whom do they hate most Him whobreaketh up their tables of values the breaker the lawbreakerhehowever is the creator.Companions the creator seeketh not corpsesand not herds or believerseither. Fellowcreators the creator seekeththose who grave new valueson new tables.Companions the creator seeketh and fellowreapers for everything isripe for the harvest with him. But he lacketh the hundred sickles so heplucketh the ears of corn and is vexed.Companions the creator seeketh and such as know how to whet theirsickles. Destroyers will they be called and despisers of good andevil. But they are the reapers and rejoicers.Fellowcreators Zarathustra seeketh fellowreapers andfellowrejoicers Zarathustra seeketh what hath he to do with herds andherdsmen and corpsesAnd thou my first companion rest in peace Well have I buried thee inthy hollow tree well have I hid thee from the wolves.But I part from thee the time hath arrived. Twixt rosy dawn and rosydawn there came unto me a new truth.I am not to be a herdsman I am not to be a gravedigger. Not any morewill I discourse unto the people for the last time have I spoken untothe dead.With the creators the reapers and the rejoicers will I associate therainbow will I show them and all the stairs to the Superman.To the lonedwellers will I sing my song and to the twaindwellersand unto him who hath still ears for the unheard will I make the heartheavy with my happiness.I make for my goal I follow my course over the loitering and tardywill I leap. Thus let my ongoing be their downgoing.This had Zarathustra said to his heart when the sun stood at noontide.Then he looked inquiringly aloftfor he heard above him the sharp callof a bird. And behold An eagle swept through the air in wide circlesand on it hung a serpent not like a prey but like a friend for itkept itself coiled round the eagles neck.They are mine animals said Zarathustra and rejoiced in his heart.The proudest animal under the sun and the wisest animal under thesunthey have come out to reconnoitre.They want to know whether Zarathustra still liveth. Verily do I stillliveMore dangerous have I found it among men than among animals indangerous paths goeth Zarathustra. Let mine animals lead meWhen Zarathustra had said this he remembered the words of the saint inthe forest. Then he sighed and spake thus to his heartWould that I were wiser Would that I were wise from the very heartlike my serpentBut I am asking the impossible. Therefore do I ask my pride to go alwayswith my wisdomAnd if my wisdom should some day forsake mealas it loveth to flyawaymay my pride then fly with my follyThus began Zarathustras downgoing.ZARATHUSTRAS DISCOURSES.I. THE THREE METAMORPHOSES.Three metamorphoses of the spirit do I designate to you how the spiritbecometh a camel the camel a lion and the lion at last a child.Many heavy things are there for the spirit the strong loadbearingspirit in which reverence dwelleth for the heavy and the heaviestlongeth its strength.What is heavy so asketh the loadbearing spirit then kneeleth it downlike the camel and wanteth to be well laden.What is the heaviest thing ye heroes asketh the loadbearing spiritthat I may take it upon me and rejoice in my strength.Is it not this To humiliate oneself in order to mortify ones pride Toexhibit ones folly in order to mock at ones wisdomOr is it this To desert our cause when it celebrateth its triumph Toascend high mountains to tempt the tempterOr is it this To feed on the acorns and grass of knowledge and for thesake of truth to suffer hunger of soulOr is it this To be sick and dismiss comforters and make friends ofthe deaf who never hear thy requestsOr is it this To go into foul water when it is the water of truth andnot disclaim cold frogs and hot toadsOr is it this To love those who despise us and give ones hand to thephantom when it is going to frighten usAll these heaviest things the loadbearing spirit taketh upon itselfand like the camel which when laden hasteneth into the wilderness sohasteneth the spirit into its wilderness.But in the loneliest wilderness happeneth the second metamorphosis herethe spirit becometh a lion freedom will it capture and lordship in itsown wilderness.Its last Lord it here seeketh hostile will it be to him and to itslast God for victory will it struggle with the great dragon.What is the great dragon which the spirit is no longer inclined to callLord and God Thou shalt is the great dragon called. But the spiritof the lion saith I will.Thou shalt lieth in its path sparkling with golda scalecoveredbeast and on every scale glittereth golden Thou shaltThe values of a thousand years glitter on those scales andthus speaketh the mightiest of all dragons All the values ofthingsglitter on me.All values have already been created and all created valuesdo Irepresent. Verily there shall be no I will any more. Thus speakeththe dragon.My brethren wherefore is there need of the lion in the spirit Whysufficeth not the beast of burden which renounceth and is reverentTo create new valuesthat even the lion cannot yet accomplish but tocreate itself freedom for new creatingthat can the might of the liondo.To create itself freedom and give a holy Nay even unto duty for thatmy brethren there is need of the lion.To assume the right to new valuesthat is the most formidableassumption for a loadbearing and reverent spirit. Verily unto such aspirit it is preying and the work of a beast of prey.As its holiest it once loved Thou shalt now is it forced to findillusion and arbitrariness even in the holiest things that it maycapture freedom from its love the lion is needed for this capture.But tell me my brethren what the child can do which even the lioncould not do Why hath the preying lion still to become a childInnocence is the child and forgetfulness a new beginning a game aselfrolling wheel a first movement a holy Yea.Aye for the game of creating my brethren there is needed a holy Yeaunto life ITS OWN will willeth now the spirit HIS OWN world winneththe worlds outcast.Three metamorphoses of the spirit have I designated to you how thespirit became a camel the camel a lion and the lion at last a child.Thus spake Zarathustra. And at that time he abode in the town which iscalled The Pied Cow.II. THE ACADEMIC CHAIRS OF VIRTUE.People commended unto Zarathustra a wise man as one who could discoursewell about sleep and virtue greatly was he honoured and rewarded forit and all the youths sat before his chair. To him went Zarathustraand sat among the youths before his chair. And thus spake the wise manRespect and modesty in presence of sleep That is the first thing Andto go out of the way of all who sleep badly and keep awake at nightModest is even the thief in presence of sleep he always stealeth softlythrough the night. Immodest however is the nightwatchman immodestlyhe carrieth his horn.No small art is it to sleep it is necessary for that purpose to keepawake all day.Ten times a day must thou overcome thyself that causeth wholesomeweariness and is poppy to the soul.Ten times must thou reconcile again with thyself for overcoming isbitterness and badly sleep the unreconciled.Ten truths must thou find during the day otherwise wilt thou seek truthduring the night and thy soul will have been hungry.Ten times must thou laugh during the day and be cheerful otherwise thystomach the father of affliction will disturb thee in the night.Few people know it but one must have all the virtues in order to sleepwell. Shall I bear false witness Shall I commit adulteryShall I covet my neighbours maidservant All that would ill accord withgood sleep.And even if one have all the virtues there is still one thing needfulto send the virtues themselves to sleep at the right time.That they may not quarrel with one another the good females And aboutthee thou unhappy onePeace with God and thy neighbour so desireth good sleep. And peace alsowith thy neighbours devil Otherwise it will haunt thee in the night.Honour to the government and obedience and also to the crookedgovernment So desireth good sleep. How can I help it if power like towalk on crooked legsHe who leadeth his sheep to the greenest pasture shall always be for methe best shepherd so doth it accord with good sleep.Many honours I want not nor great treasures they excite the spleen.But it is bad sleeping without a good name and a little treasure.A small company is more welcome to me than a bad one but they must comeand go at the right time. So doth it accord with good sleep.Well also do the poor in spirit please me they promote sleep. Blessedare they especially if one always give in to them.Thus passeth the day unto the virtuous. When night cometh then take Igood care not to summon sleep. It disliketh to be summonedsleep thelord of the virtuesBut I think of what I have done and thought during the day. Thusruminating patient as a cow I ask myself What were thy tenovercomingsAnd what were the ten reconciliations and the ten truths and the tenlaughters with which my heart enjoyed itselfThus pondering and cradled by forty thoughts it overtaketh me all atoncesleep the unsummoned the lord of the virtues.Sleep tappeth on mine eye and it turneth heavy. Sleep toucheth mymouth and it remaineth open.Verily on soft soles doth it come to me the dearest of thieves andstealeth from me my thoughts stupid do I then stand like this academicchair.But not much longer do I then stand I already lie.When Zarathustra heard the wise man thus speak he laughed in his heartfor thereby had a light dawned upon him. And thus spake he to his heartA fool seemeth this wise man with his forty thoughts but I believe heknoweth well how to sleep.Happy even is he who liveth near this wise man Such sleep iscontagiouseven through a thick wall it is contagious.A magic resideth even in his academic chair. And not in vain did theyouths sit before the preacher of virtue.His wisdom is to keep awake in order to sleep well. And verily iflife had no sense and had I to choose nonsense this would be thedesirablest nonsense for me also.Now know I well what people sought formerly above all else when theysought teachers of virtue. Good sleep they sought for themselves andpoppyhead virtues to promote itTo all those belauded sages of the academic chairs wisdom was sleepwithout dreams they knew no higher significance of life.Even at present to be sure there are some like this preacher ofvirtue and not always so honourable but their time is past. And notmuch longer do they stand there they already lie.Blessed are those drowsy ones for they shall soon nod to sleep.Thus spake Zarathustra.III. BACKWORLDSMEN.Once on a time Zarathustra also cast his fancy beyond man like allbackworldsmen. The work of a suffering and tortured God did the worldthen seem to me.The dreamand dictionof a God did the world then seem to mecoloured vapours before the eyes of a divinely dissatisfied one.Good and evil and joy and woe and I and thoucoloured vapours didthey seem to me before creative eyes. The creator wished to look awayfrom himselfthereupon he created the world.Intoxicating joy is it for the sufferer to look away from his sufferingand forget himself. Intoxicating joy and selfforgetting did the worldonce seem to me.This world the eternally imperfect an eternal contradictions imageand imperfect imagean intoxicating joy to its imperfect creatorthusdid the world once seem to me.Thus once on a time did I also cast my fancy beyond man like allbackworldsmen. Beyond man forsoothAh ye brethren that God whom I created was human work and humanmadness like all the GodsA man was he and only a poor fragment of a man and ego. Out of mine ownashes and glow it came unto me that phantom. And verily it came notunto me from the beyondWhat happened my brethren I surpassed myself the suffering one Icarried mine own ashes to the mountain a brighter flame I contrived formyself. And lo Thereupon the phantom WITHDREW from meTo me the convalescent would it now be suffering and torment to believein such phantoms suffering would it now be to me and humiliation. Thusspeak I to backworldsmen.Suffering was it and impotencethat created all backworlds andthe short madness of happiness which only the greatest suffererexperienceth.Weariness which seeketh to get to the ultimate with one leap witha deathleap a poor ignorant weariness unwilling even to will anylonger that created all Gods and backworlds.Believe me my brethren It was the body which despaired of the bodyitgroped with the fingers of the infatuated spirit at the ultimate walls.Believe me my brethren It was the body which despaired of theearthit heard the bowels of existence speaking unto it.And then it sought to get through the ultimate walls with its headandnot with its head onlyinto the other world.But that other world is well concealed from man that dehumanisedinhuman world which is a celestial naught and the bowels of existencedo not speak unto man except as man.Verily it is difficult to prove all being and hard to make it speak.Tell me ye brethren is not the strangest of all things best provedYea this ego with its contradiction and perplexity speaketh mostuprightly of its beingthis creating willing evaluing ego which isthe measure and value of things.And this most upright existence the egoit speaketh of the body andstill implieth the body even when it museth and raveth and flutterethwith broken wings.Always more uprightly learneth it to speak the ego and the more itlearneth the more doth it find titles and honours for the body and theearth.A new pride taught me mine ego and that teach I unto men no longerto thrust ones head into the sand of celestial things but to carry itfreely a terrestrial head which giveth meaning to the earthA new will teach I unto men to choose that path which man hath followedblindly and to approve of itand no longer to slink aside from itlike the sick and perishingThe sick and perishingit was they who despised the body and the earthand invented the heavenly world and the redeeming blooddrops but eventhose sweet and sad poisons they borrowed from the body and the earthFrom their misery they sought escape and the stars were too remote forthem. Then they sighed O that there were heavenly paths by which tosteal into another existence and into happiness Then they contrivedfor themselves their bypaths and bloody draughtsBeyond the sphere of their body and this earth they now fanciedthemselves transported these ungrateful ones. But to what did they owethe convulsion and rapture of their transport To their body and thisearth.Gentle is Zarathustra to the sickly. Verily he is not indignantat their modes of consolation and ingratitude. May they becomeconvalescents and overcomers and create higher bodies for themselvesNeither is Zarathustra indignant at a convalescent who looketh tenderlyon his delusions and at midnight stealeth round the grave of his Godbut sickness and a sick frame remain even in his tears.Many sickly ones have there always been among those who muse andlanguish for God violently they hate the discerning ones and thelatest of virtues which is uprightness.Backward they always gaze toward dark ages then indeed were delusionand faith something different. Raving of the reason was likeness to Godand doubt was sin.Too well do I know those godlike ones they insist on being believed inand that doubt is sin. Too well also do I know what they themselvesmost believe in.Verily not in backworlds and redeeming blooddrops but in the bodydo they also believe most and their own body is for them thethinginitself.But it is a sickly thing to them and gladly would they get out of theirskin. Therefore hearken they to the preachers of death and themselvespreach backworlds.Hearken rather my brethren to the voice of the healthy body it is amore upright and pure voice.More uprightly and purely speaketh the healthy body perfect andsquarebuilt and it speaketh of the meaning of the earth.Thus spake Zarathustra.IV. THE DESPISERS OF THE BODY.To the despisers of the body will I speak my word. I wish them neitherto learn afresh nor teach anew but only to bid farewell to their ownbodiesand thus be dumb.Body am I and soulso saith the child. And why should one not speaklike childrenBut the awakened one the knowing one saith Body am I entirely andnothing more and soul is only the name of something in the body.The body is a big sagacity a plurality with one sense a war and apeace a flock and a shepherd.An instrument of thy body is also thy little sagacity my brother whichthou callest spirita little instrument and plaything of thy bigsagacity.Ego sayest thou and art proud of that word. But the greaterthingin which thou art unwilling to believeis thy body with its bigsagacity it saith not ego but doeth it.What the sense feeleth what the spirit discerneth hath never its endin itself. But sense and spirit would fain persuade thee that they arethe end of all things so vain are they.Instruments and playthings are sense and spirit behind them thereis still the Self. The Self seeketh with the eyes of the senses ithearkeneth also with the ears of the spirit.Ever hearkeneth the Self and seeketh it compareth masterethconquereth and destroyeth. It ruleth and is also the egos ruler.Behind thy thoughts and feelings my brother there is a mighty lordan unknown sageit is called Self it dwelleth in thy body it is thybody.There is more sagacity in thy body than in thy best wisdom. And who thenknoweth why thy body requireth just thy best wisdomThy Self laugheth at thine ego and its proud prancings. What are theseprancings and flights of thought unto me it saith to itself. A bywayto my purpose. I am the leadingstring of the ego and the prompter ofits notions.The Self saith unto the ego Feel pain And thereupon it sufferethand thinketh how it may put an end theretoand for that very purpose itIS MEANT to think.The Self saith unto the ego Feel pleasure Thereupon it rejoicethand thinketh how it may ofttimes rejoiceand for that very purpose itIS MEANT to think.To the despisers of the body will I speak a word. That they despise iscaused by their esteem. What is it that created esteeming and despisingand worth and willThe creating Self created for itself esteeming and despising it createdfor itself joy and woe. The creating body created for itself spirit asa hand to its will.Even in your folly and despising ye each serve your Self ye despisersof the body. I tell you your very Self wanteth to die and turneth awayfrom life.No longer can your Self do that which it desireth mostcreate beyonditself. That is what it desireth most that is all its fervour.But it is now too late to do soso your Self wisheth to succumb yedespisers of the body.To succumbso wisheth your Self and therefore have ye become despisersof the body. For ye can no longer create beyond yourselves.And therefore are ye now angry with life and with the earth. Andunconscious envy is in the sidelong look of your contempt.I go not your way ye despisers of the body Ye are no bridges for me tothe SupermanThus spake Zarathustra.V. JOYS AND PASSIONS.My brother when thou hast a virtue and it is thine own virtue thouhast it in common with no one.To be sure thou wouldst call it by name and caress it thou wouldstpull its ears and amuse thyself with it.And lo Then hast thou its name in common with the people and hastbecome one of the people and the herd with thy virtueBetter for thee to say Ineffable is it and nameless that which ispain and sweetness to my soul and also the hunger of my bowels.Let thy virtue be too high for the familiarity of names and if thoumust speak of it be not ashamed to stammer about it.Thus speak and stammer That is MY good that do I love thus doth itplease me entirely thus only do I desire the good.Not as the law of a God do I desire it not as a human law or a humanneed do I desire it it is not to be a guidepost for me to superearthsand paradises.An earthly virtue is it which I love little prudence is therein andthe least everyday wisdom.But that bird built its nest beside me therefore I love and cherishitnow sitteth it beside me on its golden eggs.Thus shouldst thou stammer and praise thy virtue.Once hadst thou passions and calledst them evil. But now hast thou onlythy virtues they grew out of thy passions.Thou implantedst thy highest aim into the heart of those passions thenbecame they thy virtues and joys.And though thou wert of the race of the hottempered or of thevoluptuous or of the fanatical or the vindictiveAll thy passions in the end became virtues and all thy devils angels.Once hadst thou wild dogs in thy cellar but they changed at last intobirds and charming songstresses.Out of thy poisons brewedst thou balsam for thyself thy cowaffliction milkedst thounow drinketh thou the sweet milk of herudder.And nothing evil groweth in thee any longer unless it be the evil thatgroweth out of the conflict of thy virtues.My brother if thou be fortunate then wilt thou have one virtue and nomore thus goest thou easier over the bridge.Illustrious is it to have many virtues but a hard lot and many a onehath gone into the wilderness and killed himself because he was wearyof being the battle and battlefield of virtues.My brother are war and battle evil Necessary however is the evilnecessary are the envy and the distrust and the backbiting among thevirtues.Lo how each of thy virtues is covetous of the highest place it wanteththy whole spirit to be ITS herald it wanteth thy whole power in wrathhatred and love.Jealous is every virtue of the others and a dreadful thing is jealousy.Even virtues may succumb by jealousy.He whom the flame of jealousy encompasseth turneth at last like thescorpion the poisoned sting against himself.Ah my brother hast thou never seen a virtue backbite and stab itselfMan is something that hath to be surpassed and therefore shalt thoulove thy virtuesfor thou wilt succumb by them.Thus spake Zarathustra.VI. THE PALE CRIMINAL.Ye do not mean to slay ye judges and sacrificers until the animal hathbowed its head Lo the pale criminal hath bowed his head out of hiseye speaketh the great contempt.Mine ego is something which is to be surpassed mine ego is to me thegreat contempt of man so speaketh it out of that eye.When he judged himselfthat was his supreme moment let not the exaltedone relapse again into his low estateThere is no salvation for him who thus suffereth from himself unless itbe speedy death.Your slaying ye judges shall be pity and not revenge and in that yeslay see to it that ye yourselves justify lifeIt is not enough that ye should reconcile with him whom ye slay. Letyour sorrow be love to the Superman thus will ye justify your ownsurvivalEnemy shall ye say but not villain invalid shall ye say but notwretch fool shall ye say but not sinner.And thou red judge if thou would say audibly all thou hast done inthought then would every one cry Away with the nastiness and thevirulent reptileBut one thing is the thought another thing is the deed and anotherthing is the idea of the deed. The wheel of causality doth not rollbetween them.An idea made this pale man pale. Adequate was he for his deed when hedid it but the idea of it he could not endure when it was done.Evermore did he now see himself as the doer of one deed. Madness I callthis the exception reversed itself to the rule in him.The streak of chalk bewitcheth the hen the stroke he struck bewitchedhis weak reason. Madness AFTER the deed I call this.Hearken ye judges There is another madness besides and it is BEFOREthe deed. Ah ye have not gone deep enough into this soulThus speaketh the red judge Why did this criminal commit murder Hemeant to rob. I tell you however that his soul wanted blood notbooty he thirsted for the happiness of the knifeBut his weak reason understood not this madness and it persuaded him.What matter about blood it said wishest thou not at least to makebooty thereby Or take revengeAnd he hearkened unto his weak reason like lead lay its words uponhimthereupon he robbed when he murdered. He did not mean to beashamed of his madness.And now once more lieth the lead of his guilt upon him and once more ishis weak reason so benumbed so paralysed and so dull.Could he only shake his head then would his burden roll off but whoshaketh that headWhat is this man A mass of diseases that reach out into the worldthrough the spirit there they want to get their prey.What is this man A coil of wild serpents that are seldom at peace amongthemselvesso they go forth apart and seek prey in the world.Look at that poor body What it suffered and craved the poor soulinterpreted to itselfit interpreted it as murderous desire andeagerness for the happiness of the knife.Him who now turneth sick the evil overtaketh which is now the evil heseeketh to cause pain with that which causeth him pain. But there havebeen other ages and another evil and good.Once was doubt evil and the will to Self. Then the invalid became aheretic or sorcerer as heretic or sorcerer he suffered and sought tocause suffering.But this will not enter your ears it hurteth your good people ye tellme. But what doth it matter to me about your good peopleMany things in your good people cause me disgust and verily not theirevil. I would that they had a madness by which they succumbed like thispale criminalVerily I would that their madness were called truth or fidelityor justice but they have their virtue in order to live long and inwretched selfcomplacency.I am a railing alongside the torrent whoever is able to grasp me maygrasp me Your crutch however I am not.Thus spake Zarathustra.VII. READING AND WRITING.Of all that is written I love only what a person hath written with hisblood. Write with blood and thou wilt find that blood is spirit.It is no easy task to understand unfamiliar blood I hate the readingidlers.He who knoweth the reader doeth nothing more for the reader. Anothercentury of readersand spirit itself will stink.Every one being allowed to learn to read ruineth in the long run notonly writing but also thinking.Once spirit was God then it became man and now it even becomethpopulace.He that writeth in blood and proverbs doth not want to be read butlearnt by heart.In the mountains the shortest way is from peak to peak but for thatroute thou must have long legs. Proverbs should be peaks and thosespoken to should be big and tall.The atmosphere rare and pure danger near and the spirit full of ajoyful wickedness thus are things well matched.I want to have goblins about me for I am courageous. The courage whichscareth away ghosts createth for itself goblinsit wanteth to laugh.I no longer feel in common with you the very cloud which I seebeneath me the blackness and heaviness at which I laughthat is yourthundercloud.Ye look aloft when ye long for exaltation and I look downward because Iam exalted.Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exaltedHe who climbeth on the highest mountains laugheth at all tragic playsand tragic realities.Courageous unconcerned scornful coerciveso wisdom wisheth us sheis a woman and ever loveth only a warrior.Ye tell me Life is hard to bear. But for what purpose should ye haveyour pride in the morning and your resignation in the eveningLife is hard to bear but do not affect to be so delicate We are all ofus fine sumpter asses and assesses.What have we in common with the rosebud which trembleth because a dropof dew hath formed upon itIt is true we love life not because we are wont to live but because weare wont to love.There is always some madness in love. But there is always also somemethod in madness.And to me also who appreciate life the butterflies and soapbubblesand whatever is like them amongst us seem most to enjoy happiness.To see these light foolish pretty lively little sprites flitaboutthat moveth Zarathustra to tears and songs.I should only believe in a God that would know how to dance.And when I saw my devil I found him serious thorough profoundsolemn he was the spirit of gravitythrough him all things fall.Not by wrath but by laughter do we slay. Come let us slay the spiritof gravityI learned to walk since then have I let myself run. I learned to flysince then I do not need pushing in order to move from a spot.Now am I light now do I fly now do I see myself under myself. Nowthere danceth a God in me.Thus spake Zarathustra.VIII. THE TREE ON THE HILL.Zarathustras eye had perceived that a certain youth avoided him. And ashe walked alone one evening over the hills surrounding the town calledThe Pied Cow behold there found he the youth sitting leaning againsta tree and gazing with wearied look into the valley. Zarathustrathereupon laid hold of the tree beside which the youth sat and spakethusIf I wished to shake this tree with my hands I should not be able todo so.But the wind which we see not troubleth and bendeth it as it listeth.We are sorest bent and troubled by invisible hands.Thereupon the youth arose disconcerted and said I hear Zarathustraand just now was I thinking of him Zarathustra answeredWhy art thou frightened on that accountBut it is the same with manas with the tree.The more he seeketh to rise into the height and light the morevigorously do his roots struggle earthward downward into the dark anddeepinto the evil.Yea into the evil cried the youth. How is it possible that thouhast discovered my soulZarathustra smiled and said Many a soul one will never discoverunless one first invent it.Yea into the evil cried the youth once more.Thou saidst the truth Zarathustra. I trust myself no longer since Isought to rise into the height and nobody trusteth me any longer howdoth that happenI change too quickly my today refuteth my yesterday. I often overleapthe steps when I clamber for so doing none of the steps pardons me.When aloft I find myself always alone. No one speaketh unto me thefrost of solitude maketh me tremble. What do I seek on the heightMy contempt and my longing increase together the higher I clamber themore do I despise him who clambereth. What doth he seek on the heightHow ashamed I am of my clambering and stumbling How I mock at myviolent panting How I hate him who flieth How tired I am on theheightHere the youth was silent. And Zarathustra contemplated the tree besidewhich they stood and spake thusThis tree standeth lonely here on the hills it hath grown up highabove man and beast.And if it wanted to speak it would have none who could understand itso high hath it grown.Now it waiteth and waitethfor what doth it wait It dwelleth tooclose to the seat of the clouds it waiteth perhaps for the firstlightningWhen Zarathustra had said this the youth called out with violentgestures Yea Zarathustra thou speakest the truth. My destructionI longed for when I desired to be on the height and thou art thelightning for which I waited Lo what have I been since thou hastappeared amongst us It is mine envy of thee that hath destroyedmeThus spake the youth and wept bitterly. Zarathustra however puthis arm about him and led the youth away with him.And when they had walked a while together Zarathustra began to speakthusIt rendeth my heart. Better than thy words express it thine eyes tellme all thy danger.As yet thou art not free thou still SEEKEST freedom. Too unslept haththy seeking made thee and too wakeful.On the open height wouldst thou be for the stars thirsteth thy soul.But thy bad impulses also thirst for freedom.Thy wild dogs want liberty they bark for joy in their cellar when thyspirit endeavoureth to open all prison doors.Still art thou a prisonerit seemeth to mewho deviseth libertyfor himself ah sharp becometh the soul of such prisoners but alsodeceitful and wicked.To purify himself is still necessary for the freedman of the spirit.Much of the prison and the mould still remaineth in him pure hath hiseye still to become.Yea I know thy danger. But by my love and hope I conjure thee cast notthy love and hope awayNoble thou feelest thyself still and noble others also feel thee stillthough they bear thee a grudge and cast evil looks. Know this that toeverybody a noble one standeth in the way.Also to the good a noble one standeth in the way and even when theycall him a good man they want thereby to put him aside.The new would the noble man create and a new virtue. The old wanteththe good man and that the old should be conserved.But it is not the danger of the noble man to turn a good man but lesthe should become a blusterer a scoffer or a destroyer.Ah I have known noble ones who lost their highest hope. And then theydisparaged all high hopes.Then lived they shamelessly in temporary pleasures and beyond the dayhad hardly an aim.Spirit is also voluptuousnesssaid they. Then broke the wings oftheir spirit and now it creepeth about and defileth where it gnaweth.Once they thought of becoming heroes but sensualists are they now. Atrouble and a terror is the hero to them.But by my love and hope I conjure thee cast not away the hero in thysoul Maintain holy thy highest hopeThus spake Zarathustra.IX. THE PREACHERS OF DEATH.There are preachers of death and the earth is full of those to whomdesistance from life must be preached.Full is the earth of the superfluous marred is life by themanytoomany. May they be decoyed out of this life by the lifeeternalThe yellow ones so are called the preachers of death or the blackones. But I will show them unto you in other colours besides.There are the terrible ones who carry about in themselves the beast ofprey and have no choice except lusts or selflaceration. And even theirlusts are selflaceration.They have not yet become men those terrible ones may they preachdesistance from life and pass away themselvesThere are the spiritually consumptive ones hardly are they born whenthey begin to die and long for doctrines of lassitude and renunciation.They would fain be dead and we should approve of their wish Letus beware of awakening those dead ones and of damaging those livingcoffinsThey meet an invalid or an old man or a corpseand immediately theysay Life is refutedBut they only are refuted and their eye which seeth only one aspect ofexistence.Shrouded in thick melancholy and eager for the little casualties thatbring death thus do they wait and clench their teeth.Or else they grasp at sweetmeats and mock at their childishnessthereby they cling to their straw of life and mock at their stillclinging to it.Their wisdom speaketh thus A fool he who remaineth alive but so farare we fools And that is the foolishest thing in lifeLife is only suffering so say others and lie not. Then see to itthat YE cease See to it that the life ceaseth which is only sufferingAnd let this be the teaching of your virtue Thou shalt slay thyselfThou shalt steal away from thyselfLust is sinso say some who preach deathlet us go apart and begetno childrenGiving birth is troublesomesay otherswhy still give birth Onebeareth only the unfortunate And they also are preachers of death.Pity is necessaryso saith a third party. Take what I have Takewhat I am So much less doth life bind meWere they consistently pitiful then would they make their neighbourssick of life. To be wickedthat would be their true goodness.But they want to be rid of life what care they if they bind othersstill faster with their chains and giftsAnd ye also to whom life is rough labour and disquiet are ye not verytired of life Are ye not very ripe for the sermon of deathAll ye to whom rough labour is dear and the rapid new and strangeyeput up with yourselves badly your diligence is flight and the will toselfforgetfulness.If ye believed more in life then would ye devote yourselves less to themomentary. But for waiting ye have not enough of capacity in younoreven for idlingEverywhere resoundeth the voices of those who preach death and theearth is full of those to whom death hath to be preached.Or life eternal it is all the same to meif only they pass awayquicklyThus spake Zarathustra.X. WAR AND WARRIORS.By our best enemies we do not want to be spared nor by those eitherwhom we love from the very heart. So let me tell you the truthMy brethren in war I love you from the very heart. I am and was everyour counterpart. And I am also your best enemy. So let me tell you thetruthI know the hatred and envy of your hearts. Ye are not great enough notto know of hatred and envy. Then be great enough not to be ashamed ofthemAnd if ye cannot be saints of knowledge then I pray you be at leastits warriors. They are the companions and forerunners of such saintship.I see many soldiers could I but see many warriors Uniform onecalleth what they wear may it not be uniform what they therewith hideYe shall be those whose eyes ever seek for an enemyfor YOUR enemy. Andwith some of you there is hatred at first sight.Your enemy shall ye seek your war shall ye wage and for the sake ofyour thoughts And if your thoughts succumb your uprightness shallstill shout triumph therebyYe shall love peace as a means to new warsand the short peace morethan the long.You I advise not to work but to fight. You I advise not to peace butto victory. Let your work be a fight let your peace be a victoryOne can only be silent and sit peacefully when one hath arrow and bowotherwise one prateth and quarrelleth. Let your peace be a victoryYe say it is the good cause which halloweth even war I say unto you itis the good war which halloweth every cause.War and courage have done more great things than charity. Not yoursympathy but your bravery hath hitherto saved the victims.What is good ye ask. To be brave is good. Let the little girls sayTo be good is what is pretty and at the same time touching.They call you heartless but your heart is true and I love thebashfulness of your goodwill. Ye are ashamed of your flow and othersare ashamed of their ebb.Ye are ugly Well then my brethren take the sublime about you themantle of the uglyAnd when your soul becometh great then doth it become haughty and inyour sublimity there is wickedness. I know you.In wickedness the haughty man and the weakling meet. But theymisunderstand one another. I know you.Ye shall only have enemies to be hated but not enemies to be despised.Ye must be proud of your enemies then the successes of your enemiesare also your successes.Resistancethat is the distinction of the slave. Let your distinctionbe obedience. Let your commanding itself be obeyingTo the good warrior soundeth thou shalt pleasanter than I will. Andall that is dear unto you ye shall first have it commanded unto you.Let your love to life be love to your highest hope and let your highesthope be the highest thought of lifeYour highest thought however ye shall have it commanded unto you bymeand it is this man is something that is to be surpassed.So live your life of obedience and of war What matter about long lifeWhat warrior wisheth to be sparedI spare you not I love you from my very heart my brethren in warThus spake Zarathustra.XI. THE NEW IDOL.Somewhere there are still peoples and herds but not with us mybrethren here there are states.A state What is that Well open now your ears unto me for now will Isay unto you my word concerning the death of peoples.A state is called the coldest of all cold monsters. Coldly liethit also and this lie creepeth from its mouth I the state am thepeople.It is a lie Creators were they who created peoples and hung a faithand a love over them thus they served life.Destroyers are they who lay snares for many and call it the statethey hang a sword and a hundred cravings over them.Where there is still a people there the state is not understood buthated as the evil eye and as sin against laws and customs.This sign I give unto you every people speaketh its language of goodand evil this its neighbour understandeth not. Its language hath itdevised for itself in laws and customs.But the state lieth in all languages of good and evil and whatever itsaith it lieth and whatever it hath it hath stolen.False is everything in it with stolen teeth it biteth the biting one.False are even its bowels.Confusion of language of good and evil this sign I give unto you asthe sign of the state. Verily the will to death indicateth this signVerily it beckoneth unto the preachers of deathMany too many are born for the superfluous ones was the state devisedSee just how it enticeth them to it the manytoomany How itswalloweth and cheweth and recheweth themOn earth there is nothing greater than I it is I who am the regulatingfinger of Godthus roareth the monster. And not only the longearedand shortsighted fall upon their kneesAh even in your ears ye great souls it whispereth its gloomy liesAh it findeth out the rich hearts which willingly lavish themselvesYea it findeth you out too ye conquerors of the old God Weary yebecame of the conflict and now your weariness serveth the new idolHeroes and honourable ones it would fain set up around it the newidol Gladly it basketh in the sunshine of good consciencesthe coldmonsterEverything will it give YOU if YE worship it the new idol thus itpurchaseth the lustre of your virtue and the glance of your proud eyes.It seeketh to allure by means of you the manytoomany Yea a hellishartifice hath here been devised a deathhorse jingling with thetrappings of divine honoursYea a dying for many hath here been devised which glorifieth itself aslife verily a hearty service unto all preachers of deathThe state I call it where all are poisondrinkers the good and thebad the state where all lose themselves the good and the bad thestate where the slow suicide of allis called life.Just see these superfluous ones They steal the works of the inventorsand the treasures of the wise. Culture they call their theftandeverything becometh sickness and trouble unto themJust see these superfluous ones Sick are they always they vomit theirbile and call it a newspaper. They devour one another and cannot evendigest themselves.Just see these superfluous ones Wealth they acquire and become poorerthereby. Power they seek for and above all the lever of power muchmoneythese impotent onesSee them clamber these nimble apes They clamber over one another andthus scuffle into the mud and the abyss.Towards the throne they all strive it is their madnessas if happinesssat on the throne Ofttimes sitteth filth on the throne.and ofttimesalso the throne on filth.Madmen they all seem to me and clambering apes and too eager. Badlysmelleth their idol to me the cold monster badly they all smell to methese idolaters.My brethren will ye suffocate in the fumes of their maws and appetitesBetter break the windows and jump into the open airDo go out of the way of the bad odour Withdraw from the idolatry of thesuperfluousDo go out of the way of the bad odour Withdraw from the steam of thesehuman sacrificesOpen still remaineth the earth for great souls. Empty are still manysites for lone ones and twain ones around which floateth the odour oftranquil seas.Open still remaineth a free life for great souls. Verily he whopossesseth little is so much the less possessed blessed be moderatepovertyThere where the state ceaseththere only commenceth the man who is notsuperfluous there commenceth the song of the necessary ones the singleand irreplaceable melody.There where the state CEASETHpray look thither my brethren Do yenot see it the rainbow and the bridges of the SupermanThus spake Zarathustra.XII. THE FLIES IN THE MARKETPLACE.Flee my friend into thy solitude I see thee deafened with the noiseof the great men and stung all over with the stings of the little ones.Admirably do forest and rock know how to be silent with thee. Resembleagain the tree which thou lovest the broadbranched onesilently andattentively it oerhangeth the sea.Where solitude endeth there beginneth the marketplace and where themarketplace beginneth there beginneth also the noise of the greatactors and the buzzing of the poisonflies.In the world even the best things are worthless without those whorepresent them those representers the people call great men.Little do the people understand what is greatthat is to say thecreating agency. But they have a taste for all representers and actorsof great things.Around the devisers of new values revolveth the worldinvisibly itrevolveth. But around the actors revolve the people and the glory suchis the course of things.Spirit hath the actor but little conscience of the spirit. Hebelieveth always in that wherewith he maketh believe most stronglyinHIMSELFTomorrow he hath a new belief and the day after one still newer. Sharpperceptions hath he like the people and changeable humours.To upsetthat meaneth with him to prove. To drive madthat meanethwith him to convince. And blood is counted by him as the best of allarguments.A truth which only glideth into fine ears he calleth falsehood andtrumpery. Verily he believeth only in Gods that make a great noise inthe worldFull of clattering buffoons is the marketplaceand the people gloryin their great men These are for them the masters of the hour.But the hour presseth them so they press thee. And also from theethey want Yea or Nay. Alas thou wouldst set thy chair betwixt For andAgainstOn account of those absolute and impatient ones be not jealous thoulover of truth Never yet did truth cling to the arm of an absolute one.On account of those abrupt ones return into thy security only in themarketplace is one assailed by Yea or NaySlow is the experience of all deep fountains long have they to waituntil they know WHAT hath fallen into their depths.Away from the marketplace and from fame taketh place all that is greataway from the marketplace and from fame have ever dwelt the devisers ofnew values.Flee my friend into thy solitude I see thee stung all over by thepoisonous flies. Flee thither where a rough strong breeze blowethFlee into thy solitude Thou hast lived too closely to the small and thepitiable. Flee from their invisible vengeance Towards thee they havenothing but vengeance.Raise no longer an arm against them Innumerable are they and it is notthy lot to be a flyflap.Innumerable are the small and pitiable ones and of many a proudstructure raindrops and weeds have been the ruin.Thou art not stone but already hast thou become hollow by the numerousdrops. Thou wilt yet break and burst by the numerous drops.Exhausted I see thee by poisonous flies bleeding I see thee and tornat a hundred spots and thy pride will not even upbraid.Blood they would have from thee in all innocence blood their bloodlesssouls crave forand they sting therefore in all innocence.But thou profound one thou sufferest too profoundly even from smallwounds and ere thou hadst recovered the same poisonworm crawled overthy hand.Too proud art thou to kill these sweettooths. But take care lest it bethy fate to suffer all their poisonous injusticeThey buzz around thee also with their praise obtrusiveness is theirpraise. They want to be close to thy skin and thy blood.They flatter thee as one flattereth a God or devil they whimper beforethee as before a God or devil. What doth it come to Flatterers arethey and whimperers and nothing more.Often also do they show themselves to thee as amiable ones. But thathath ever been the prudence of the cowardly. Yea the cowardly are wiseThey think much about thee with their circumscribed soulsthou artalways suspected by them Whatever is much thought about is at lastthought suspicious.They punish thee for all thy virtues. They pardon thee in their inmosthearts onlyfor thine errors.Because thou art gentle and of upright character thou sayestBlameless are they for their small existence. But their circumscribedsouls think Blamable is all great existence.Even when thou art gentle towards them they still feel themselvesdespised by thee and they repay thy beneficence with secretmaleficence.Thy silent pride is always counter to their taste they rejoice if oncethou be humble enough to be frivolous.What we recognise in a man we also irritate in him. Therefore be onyour guard against the small onesIn thy presence they feel themselves small and their baseness gleamethand gloweth against thee in invisible vengeance.Sawest thou not how often they became dumb when thou approachedst themand how their energy left them like the smoke of an extinguishing fireYea my friend the bad conscience art thou of thy neighbours for theyare unworthy of thee. Therefore they hate thee and would fain suck thyblood.Thy neighbours will always be poisonous flies what is great intheethat itself must make them more poisonous and always moreflylike.Flee my friend into thy solitudeand thither where a rough strongbreeze bloweth. It is not thy lot to be a flyflap.Thus spake Zarathustra.XIII. CHASTITY.I love the forest. It is bad to live in cities there there are toomany of the lustful.Is it not better to fall into the hands of a murderer than into thedreams of a lustful womanAnd just look at these men their eye saith itthey know nothing betteron earth than to lie with a woman.Filth is at the bottom of their souls and alas if their filth hathstill spirit in itWould that ye were perfectat least as animals But to animalsbelongeth innocence.Do I counsel you to slay your instincts I counsel you to innocence inyour instincts.Do I counsel you to chastity Chastity is a virtue with some but withmany almost a vice.These are continent to be sure but doggish lust looketh enviously outof all that they do.Even into the heights of their virtue and into their cold spirit doththis creature follow them with its discord.And how nicely can doggish lust beg for a piece of spirit when a pieceof flesh is denied itYe love tragedies and all that breaketh the heart But I am distrustfulof your doggish lust.Ye have too cruel eyes and ye look wantonly towards the sufferers.Hath not your lust just disguised itself and taken the name offellowsufferingAnd also this parable give I unto you Not a few who meant to cast outtheir devil went thereby into the swine themselves.To whom chastity is difficult it is to be dissuaded lest it become theroad to hellto filth and lust of soul.Do I speak of filthy things That is not the worst thing for me to do.Not when the truth is filthy but when it is shallow doth thediscerning one go unwillingly into its waters.Verily there are chaste ones from their very nature they are gentlerof heart and laugh better and oftener than you.They laugh also at chastity and ask What is chastityIs chastity not folly But the folly came unto us and not we unto it.We offered that guest harbour and heart now it dwelleth with uslet itstay as long as it willThus spake Zarathustra.XIV. THE FRIEND.One is always too many about methinketh the anchorite. Always onceonethat maketh two in the long runI and me are always too earnestly in conversation how could it beendured if there were not a friendThe friend of the anchorite is always the third one the third one isthe cork which preventeth the conversation of the two sinking into thedepth.Ah there are too many depths for all anchorites. Therefore do theylong so much for a friend and for his elevation.Our faith in others betrayeth wherein we would fain have faith inourselves. Our longing for a friend is our betrayer.And often with our love we want merely to overleap envy. And often weattack and make ourselves enemies to conceal that we are vulnerable.Be at least mine enemythus speaketh the true reverence which dothnot venture to solicit friendship.If one would have a friend then must one also be willing to wage warfor him and in order to wage war one must be CAPABLE of being anenemy.One ought still to honour the enemy in ones friend. Canst thou go nighunto thy friend and not go over to himIn ones friend one shall have ones best enemy. Thou shalt be closestunto him with thy heart when thou withstandest him.Thou wouldst wear no raiment before thy friend It is in honour of thyfriend that thou showest thyself to him as thou art But he wisheth theeto the devil on that accountHe who maketh no secret of himself shocketh so much reason have yeto fear nakedness Aye if ye were Gods ye could then be ashamed ofclothingThou canst not adorn thyself fine enough for thy friend for thou shaltbe unto him an arrow and a longing for the Superman.Sawest thou ever thy friend asleepto know how he looketh What isusually the countenance of thy friend It is thine own countenance in acoarse and imperfect mirror.Sawest thou ever thy friend asleep Wert thou not dismayed at thy friendlooking so O my friend man is something that hath to be surpassed.In divining and keeping silence shall the friend be a master noteverything must thou wish to see. Thy dream shall disclose unto theewhat thy friend doeth when awake.Let thy pity be a divining to know first if thy friend wanteth pity.Perhaps he loveth in thee the unmoved eye and the look of eternity.Let thy pity for thy friend be hid under a hard shell thou shalt biteout a tooth upon it. Thus will it have delicacy and sweetness.Art thou pure air and solitude and bread and medicine to thy friendMany a one cannot loosen his own fetters but is nevertheless hisfriends emancipator.Art thou a slave Then thou canst not be a friend. Art thou a tyrantThen thou canst not have friends.Far too long hath there been a slave and a tyrant concealed in woman.On that account woman is not yet capable of friendship she knoweth onlylove.In womans love there is injustice and blindness to all she doth notlove. And even in womans conscious love there is still always surpriseand lightning and night along with the light.As yet woman is not capable of friendship women are still cats andbirds. Or at the best cows.As yet woman is not capable of friendship. But tell me ye men who ofyou are capable of friendshipOh your poverty ye men and your sordidness of soul As much as yegive to your friend will I give even to my foe and will not havebecome poorer thereby.There is comradeship may there be friendshipThus spake Zarathustra.XV. THE THOUSAND AND ONE GOALS.Many lands saw Zarathustra and many peoples thus he discovered thegood and bad of many peoples. No greater power did Zarathustra find onearth than good and bad.No people could live without first valuing if a people will maintainitself however it must not value as its neighbour valueth.Much that passed for good with one people was regarded with scorn andcontempt by another thus I found it. Much found I here called badwhich was there decked with purple honours.Never did the one neighbour understand the other ever did his soulmarvel at his neighbours delusion and wickedness.A table of excellencies hangeth over every people. Lo it is the tableof their triumphs lo it is the voice of their Will to Power.It is laudable what they think hard what is indispensable and hardthey call good and what relieveth in the direst distress the uniqueand hardest of allthey extol as holy.Whatever maketh them rule and conquer and shine to the dismay and envyof their neighbours they regard as the high and foremost thing thetest and the meaning of all else.Verily my brother if thou knewest but a peoples need its landits sky and its neighbour then wouldst thou divine the law of itssurmountings and why it climbeth up that ladder to its hope.Always shalt thou be the foremost and prominent above others no oneshall thy jealous soul love except a friendthat made the soul of aGreek thrill thereby went he his way to greatness.To speak truth and be skilful with bow and arrowso seemed it alikepleasing and hard to the people from whom cometh my namethe name whichis alike pleasing and hard to me.To honour father and mother and from the root of the soul to do theirwillthis table of surmounting hung another people over them andbecame powerful and permanent thereby.To have fidelity and for the sake of fidelity to risk honour andblood even in evil and dangerous coursesteaching itself so anotherpeople mastered itself and thus mastering itself became pregnant andheavy with great hopes.Verily men have given unto themselves all their good and bad. Verilythey took it not they found it not it came not unto them as a voicefrom heaven.Values did man only assign to things in order to maintain himselfhecreated only the significance of things a human significanceTherefore calleth he himself man that is the valuator.Valuing is creating hear it ye creating ones Valuation itself is thetreasure and jewel of the valued things.Through valuation only is there value and without valuation the nut ofexistence would be hollow. Hear it ye creating onesChange of valuesthat is change of the creating ones. Always doth hedestroy who hath to be a creator.Creating ones were first of all peoples and only in late timesindividuals verily the individual himself is still the latestcreation.Peoples once hung over them tables of the good. Love which would ruleand love which would obey created for themselves such tables.Older is the pleasure in the herd than the pleasure in the ego and aslong as the good conscience is for the herd the bad conscience onlysaith ego.Verily the crafty ego the loveless one that seeketh its advantage inthe advantage of manyit is not the origin of the herd but its ruin.Loving ones was it always and creating ones that created good andbad. Fire of love gloweth in the names of all the virtues and fire ofwrath.Many lands saw Zarathustra and many peoples no greater power didZarathustra find on earth than the creations of the loving onesgood and bad are they called.Verily a prodigy is this power of praising and blaming. Tell me yebrethren who will master it for me Who will put a fetter upon thethousand necks of this animalA thousand goals have there been hitherto for a thousand peoples havethere been. Only the fetter for the thousand necks is still lackingthere is lacking the one goal. As yet humanity hath not a goal.But pray tell me my brethren if the goal of humanity be still lackingis there not also still lackinghumanity itselfThus spake Zarathustra.XVI. NEIGHBOURLOVE.Ye crowd around your neighbour and have fine words for it. But I sayunto you your neighbourlove is your bad love of yourselves.Ye flee unto your neighbour from yourselves and would fain make avirtue thereof but I fathom your unselfishness.The THOU is older than the I the THOU hath been consecrated but notyet the I so man presseth nigh unto his neighbour.Do I advise you to neighbourlove Rather do I advise you toneighbourflight and to furthest loveHigher than love to your neighbour is love to the furthest and futureones higher still than love to men is love to things and phantoms.The phantom that runneth on before thee my brother is fairer thanthou why dost thou not give unto it thy flesh and thy bones But thoufearest and runnest unto thy neighbour.Ye cannot endure it with yourselves and do not love yourselvessufficiently so ye seek to mislead your neighbour into love and wouldfain gild yourselves with his error.Would that ye could not endure it with any kind of near ones or theirneighbours then would ye have to create your friend and his overflowingheart out of yourselves.Ye call in a witness when ye want to speak well of yourselves andwhen ye have misled him to think well of you ye also think well ofyourselves.Not only doth he lie who speaketh contrary to his knowledge but moreso he who speaketh contrary to his ignorance. And thus speak yeof yourselves in your intercourse and belie your neighbour withyourselves.Thus saith the fool Association with men spoileth the characterespecially when one hath none.The one goeth to his neighbour because he seeketh himself and the otherbecause he would fain lose himself. Your bad love to yourselves makethsolitude a prison to you.The furthest ones are they who pay for your love to the near ones andwhen there are but five of you together a sixth must always die.I love not your festivals either too many actors found I there andeven the spectators often behaved like actors.Not the neighbour do I teach you but the friend. Let the friend be thefestival of the earth to you and a foretaste of the Superman.I teach you the friend and his overflowing heart. But one must know howto be a sponge if one would be loved by overflowing hearts.I teach you the friend in whom the world standeth complete a capsuleof the goodthe creating friend who hath always a complete world tobestow.And as the world unrolled itself for him so rolleth it together againfor him in rings as the growth of good through evil as the growth ofpurpose out of chance.Let the future and the furthest be the motive of thy today in thyfriend shalt thou love the Superman as thy motive.My brethren I advise you not to neighbourloveI advise you tofurthest loveThus spake Zarathustra.XVII. THE WAY OF THE CREATING ONE.Wouldst thou go into isolation my brother Wouldst thou seek the wayunto thyself Tarry yet a little and hearken unto me.He who seeketh may easily get lost himself. All isolation is wrong sosay the herd. And long didst thou belong to the herd.The voice of the herd will still echo in thee. And when thou sayestI have no longer a conscience in common with you then will it be aplaint and a pain.Lo that pain itself did the same conscience produce and the last gleamof that conscience still gloweth on thine affliction.But thou wouldst go the way of thine affliction which is the way untothyself Then show me thine authority and thy strength to do soArt thou a new strength and a new authority A first motion Aselfrolling wheel Canst thou also compel stars to revolve around theeAlas there is so much lusting for loftiness There are so manyconvulsions of the ambitions Show me that thou art not a lusting andambitious oneAlas there are so many great thoughts that do nothing more than thebellows they inflate and make emptier than ever.Free dost thou call thyself Thy ruling thought would I hear of andnot that thou hast escaped from a yoke.Art thou one ENTITLED to escape from a yoke Many a one hath cast awayhis final worth when he hath cast away his servitude.Free from what What doth that matter to Zarathustra Clearly howevershall thine eye show unto me free FOR WHATCanst thou give unto thyself thy bad and thy good and set up thy willas a law over thee Canst thou be judge for thyself and avenger of thylawTerrible is aloneness with the judge and avenger of ones own law.Thus is a star projected into desert space and into the icy breath ofaloneness.Today sufferest thou still from the multitude thou individual todayhast thou still thy courage unabated and thy hopes.But one day will the solitude weary thee one day will thy pride yieldand thy courage quail. Thou wilt one day cry I am aloneOne day wilt thou see no longer thy loftiness and see too closely thylowliness thy sublimity itself will frighten thee as a phantom. Thouwilt one day cry All is falseThere are feelings which seek to slay the lonesome one if they do notsucceed then must they themselves die But art thou capable of ittobe a murdererHast thou ever known my brother the word disdain And the anguish ofthy justice in being just to those that disdain theeThou forcest many to think differently about thee that charge theyheavily to thine account. Thou camest nigh unto them and yet wentestpast for that they never forgive thee.Thou goest beyond them but the higher thou risest the smaller doth theeye of envy see thee. Most of all however is the flying one hated.How could ye be just unto memust thou sayI choose your injusticeas my allotted portion.Injustice and filth cast they at the lonesome one but my brother ifthou wouldst be a star thou must shine for them none the less on thataccountAnd be on thy guard against the good and just They would fain crucifythose who devise their own virtuethey hate the lonesome ones.Be on thy guard also against holy simplicity All is unholy to it thatis not simple fain likewise would it play with the fireof the fagotand stake.And be on thy guard also against the assaults of thy love Too readilydoth the recluse reach his hand to any one who meeteth him.To many a one mayest thou not give thy hand but only thy paw and Iwish thy paw also to have claws.But the worst enemy thou canst meet wilt thou thyself always be thouwaylayest thyself in caverns and forests.Thou lonesome one thou goest the way to thyself And past thyself andthy seven devils leadeth thy wayA heretic wilt thou be to thyself and a wizard and a soothsayer and afool and a doubter and a reprobate and a villain.Ready must thou be to burn thyself in thine own flame how couldst thoubecome new if thou have not first become ashesThou lonesome one thou goest the way of the creating one a God wiltthou create for thyself out of thy seven devilsThou lonesome one thou goest the way of the loving one thou lovestthyself and on that account despisest thou thyself as only the lovingones despise.To create desireth the loving one because he despiseth What knowethhe of love who hath not been obliged to despise just what he lovedWith thy love go into thine isolation my brother and with thycreating and late only will justice limp after thee.With my tears go into thine isolation my brother. I love him whoseeketh to create beyond himself and thus succumbeth.Thus spake Zarathustra.XVIII. OLD AND YOUNG WOMEN.Why stealest thou along so furtively in the twilight Zarathustra Andwhat hidest thou so carefully under thy mantleIs it a treasure that hath been given thee Or a child that hath beenborn thee Or goest thou thyself on a thiefs errand thou friend of theevilVerily my brother said Zarathustra it is a treasure that hath beengiven me it is a little truth which I carry.But it is naughty like a young child and if I hold not its mouth itscreameth too loudly.As I went on my way alone today at the hour when the sun declineththere met me an old woman and she spake thus unto my soulMuch hath Zarathustra spoken also to us women but never spake he untous concerning woman.And I answered her Concerning woman one should only talk unto men.Talk also unto me of woman said she I am old enough to forget itpresently.And I obliged the old woman and spake thus unto herEverything in woman is a riddle and everything in woman hath onesolutionit is called pregnancy.Man is for woman a means the purpose is always the child. But what iswoman for manTwo different things wanteth the true man danger and diversion.Therefore wanteth he woman as the most dangerous plaything.Man shall be trained for war and woman for the recreation of thewarrior all else is folly.Too sweet fruitsthese the warrior liketh not. Therefore liketh hewomanbitter is even the sweetest woman.Better than man doth woman understand children but man is more childishthan woman.In the true man there is a child hidden it wanteth to play. Up then yewomen and discover the child in manA plaything let woman be pure and fine like the precious stoneillumined with the virtues of a world not yet come.Let the beam of a star shine in your love Let your hope say May Ibear the SupermanIn your love let there be valour With your love shall ye assail him whoinspireth you with fearIn your love be your honour Little doth woman understand otherwiseabout honour. But let this be your honour always to love more than yeare loved and never be the second.Let man fear woman when she loveth then maketh she every sacrifice andeverything else she regardeth as worthless.Let man fear woman when she hateth for man in his innermost soul ismerely evil woman however is mean.Whom hateth woman mostThus spake the iron to the loadstone I hatethee most because thou attractest but art too weak to draw unto thee.The happiness of man is I will. The happiness of woman is He will.Lo now hath the world become perfectthus thinketh every woman whenshe obeyeth with all her love.Obey must the woman and find a depth for her surface. Surface iswomans soul a mobile stormy film on shallow water.Mans soul however is deep its current gusheth in subterraneancaverns woman surmiseth its force but comprehendeth it not.Then answered me the old woman Many fine things hath Zarathustra saidespecially for those who are young enough for them.Strange Zarathustra knoweth little about woman and yet he is rightabout them Doth this happen because with women nothing is impossibleAnd now accept a little truth by way of thanks I am old enough for itSwaddle it up and hold its mouth otherwise it will scream too loudlythe little truth.Give me woman thy little truth said I. And thus spake the oldwomanThou goest to women Do not forget thy whipThus spake Zarathustra.XIX. THE BITE OF THE ADDER.One day had Zarathustra fallen asleep under a figtree owing to theheat with his arms over his face. And there came an adder and bit himin the neck so that Zarathustra screamed with pain. When he hadtaken his arm from his face he looked at the serpent and then did itrecognise the eyes of Zarathustra wriggled awkwardly and tried to getaway. Not at all said Zarathustra as yet hast thou not receivedmy thanks Thou hast awakened me in time my journey is yet long. Thy journey is short said the adder sadly my poison is fatal. Zarathustra smiled. When did ever a dragon die of a serpentspoisonsaid he. But take thy poison back Thou art not rich enoughto present it to me. Then fell the adder again on his neck and lickedhis wound.When Zarathustra once told this to his disciples they asked himAnd what O Zarathustra is the moral of thy story And Zarathustraanswered them thusThe destroyer of morality the good and just call me my story isimmoral.When however ye have an enemy then return him not good for evil forthat would abash him. But prove that he hath done something good to you.And rather be angry than abash any one And when ye are cursed itpleaseth me not that ye should then desire to bless. Rather curse alittle alsoAnd should a great injustice befall you then do quickly five small onesbesides. Hideous to behold is he on whom injustice presseth alone.Did ye ever know this Shared injustice is half justice. And he who canbear it shall take the injustice upon himselfA small revenge is humaner than no revenge at all. And if the punishmentbe not also a right and an honour to the transgressor I do not likeyour punishing.Nobler is it to own oneself in the wrong than to establish ones rightespecially if one be in the right. Only one must be rich enough to doso.I do not like your cold justice out of the eye of your judges therealways glanceth the executioner and his cold steel.Tell me where find we justice which is love with seeing eyesDevise me then the love which not only beareth all punishment butalso all guiltDevise me then the justice which acquitteth every one except thejudgeAnd would ye hear this likewise To him who seeketh to be just from theheart even the lie becometh philanthropy.But how could I be just from the heart How can I give every one hisown Let this be enough for me I give unto every one mine own.Finally my brethren guard against doing wrong to any anchorite. Howcould an anchorite forget How could he requiteLike a deep well is an anchorite. Easy is it to throw in a stone ifit should sink to the bottom however tell me who will bring it outagainGuard against injuring the anchorite If ye have done so however wellthen kill him alsoThus spake Zarathustra.XX. CHILD AND MARRIAGE.I have a question for thee alone my brother like a soundinglead castI this question into thy soul that I may know its depth.Thou art young and desirest child and marriage. But I ask thee Artthou a man ENTITLED to desire a childArt thou the victorious one the selfconqueror the ruler of thypassions the master of thy virtues Thus do I ask thee.Or doth the animal speak in thy wish and necessity Or isolation Ordiscord in theeI would have thy victory and freedom long for a child. Living monumentsshalt thou build to thy victory and emancipation.Beyond thyself shalt thou build. But first of all must thou be builtthyself rectangular in body and soul.Not only onward shalt thou propagate thyself but upward For thatpurpose may the garden of marriage help theeA higher body shalt thou create a first movement a spontaneouslyrolling wheela creating one shalt thou create.Marriage so call I the will of the twain to create the one that ismore than those who created it. The reverence for one another as thoseexercising such a will call I marriage.Let this be the significance and the truth of thy marriage. But thatwhich the manytoomany call marriage those superfluous onesah whatshall I call itAh the poverty of soul in the twain Ah the filth of soul in thetwain Ah the pitiable selfcomplacency in the twainMarriage they call it all and they say their marriages are made inheaven.Well I do not like it that heaven of the superfluous No I do notlike them those animals tangled in the heavenly toilsFar from me also be the God who limpeth thither to bless what he hathnot matchedLaugh not at such marriages What child hath not had reason to weep overits parentsWorthy did this man seem and ripe for the meaning of the earth butwhen I saw his wife the earth seemed to me a home for madcaps.Yea I would that the earth shook with convulsions when a saint and agoose mate with one another.This one went forth in quest of truth as a hero and at last got forhimself a small deckedup lie his marriage he calleth it.That one was reserved in intercourse and chose choicely. But one time hespoilt his company for all time his marriage he calleth it.Another sought a handmaid with the virtues of an angel. But all at oncehe became the handmaid of a woman and now would he need also to becomean angel.Careful have I found all buyers and all of them have astute eyes. Buteven the astutest of them buyeth his wife in a sack.Many short folliesthat is called love by you. And your marriageputteth an end to many short follies with one long stupidity.Your love to woman and womans love to manah would that it weresympathy for suffering and veiled deities But generally two animalsalight on one another.But even your best love is only an enraptured simile and a painfulardour. It is a torch to light you to loftier paths.Beyond yourselves shall ye love some day Then LEARN first of all tolove. And on that account ye had to drink the bitter cup of your love.Bitterness is in the cup even of the best love thus doth it causelonging for the Superman thus doth it cause thirst in thee thecreating oneThirst in the creating one arrow and longing for the Superman tell memy brother is this thy will to marriageHoly call I such a will and such a marriage.Thus spake Zarathustra.XXI. VOLUNTARY DEATH.Many die too late and some die too early. Yet strange soundeth theprecept Die at the right timeDie at the right time so teacheth Zarathustra.To be sure he who never liveth at the right time how could he ever dieat the right time Would that he might never be bornThus do I advisethe superfluous ones.But even the superfluous ones make much ado about their death and eventhe hollowest nut wanteth to be cracked.Every one regardeth dying as a great matter but as yet death is nota festival. Not yet have people learned to inaugurate the finestfestivals.The consummating death I show unto you which becometh a stimulus andpromise to the living.His death dieth the consummating one triumphantly surrounded by hopingand promising ones.Thus should one learn to die and there should be no festival at whichsuch a dying one doth not consecrate the oaths of the livingThus to die is best the next best however is to die in battle andsacrifice a great soul.But to the fighter equally hateful as to the victor is your grinningdeath which stealeth nigh like a thiefand yet cometh as master.My death praise I unto you the voluntary death which cometh unto mebecause I want it.And when shall I want itHe that hath a goal and an heir wantethdeath at the right time for the goal and the heir.And out of reverence for the goal and the heir he will hang up no morewithered wreaths in the sanctuary of life.Verily not the ropemakers will I resemble they lengthen out theircord and thereby go ever backward.Many a one also waxeth too old for his truths and triumphs atoothless mouth hath no longer the right to every truth.And whoever wanteth to have fame must take leave of honour betimes andpractise the difficult art ofgoing at the right time.One must discontinue being feasted upon when one tasteth best that isknown by those who want to be long loved.Sour apples are there no doubt whose lot is to wait until the lastday of autumn and at the same time they become ripe yellow andshrivelled.In some ageth the heart first and in others the spirit. And some arehoary in youth but the late young keep long young.To many men life is a failure a poisonworm gnaweth at their heart.Then let them see to it that their dying is all the more a success.Many never become sweet they rot even in the summer. It is cowardicethat holdeth them fast to their branches.Far too many live and far too long hang they on their branches. Wouldthat a storm came and shook all this rottenness and wormeatenness fromthe treeWould that there came preachers of SPEEDY death Those would be theappropriate storms and agitators of the trees of life But I hear onlyslow death preached and patience with all that is earthly.Ah ye preach patience with what is earthly This earthly is it thathath too much patience with you ye blasphemersVerily too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow deathhonour and to many hath it proved a calamity that he died too early.As yet had he known only tears and the melancholy of the Hebrewstogether with the hatred of the good and justthe Hebrew Jesus thenwas he seized with the longing for death.Had he but remained in the wilderness and far from the good and justThen perhaps would he have learned to live and love the earthandlaughter alsoBelieve it my brethren He died too early he himself would havedisavowed his doctrine had he attained to my age Noble enough was he todisavowBut he was still immature. Immaturely loveth the youth and immaturelyalso hateth he man and earth. Confined and awkward are still his souland the wings of his spirit.But in man there is more of the child than in the youth and less ofmelancholy better understandeth he about life and death.Free for death and free in death a holy Naysayer when there is nolonger time for Yea thus understandeth he about death and life.That your dying may not be a reproach to man and the earth my friendsthat do I solicit from the honey of your soul.In your dying shall your spirit and your virtue still shine like anevening afterglow around the earth otherwise your dying hath beenunsatisfactory.Thus will I die myself that ye friends may love the earth more for mysake and earth will I again become to have rest in her that bore me.Verily a goal had Zarathustra he threw his ball. Now be ye friends theheirs of my goal to you throw I the golden ball.Best of all do I see you my friends throw the golden ball And sotarry I still a little while on the earthpardon me for itThus spake Zarathustra.XXII. THE BESTOWING VIRTUE..When Zarathustra had taken leave of the town to which his heart wasattached the name of which is The Pied Cow there followed him manypeople who called themselves his disciples and kept him company. Thuscame they to a crossroad. Then Zarathustra told them that he now wantedto go alone for he was fond of going alone. His disciples howeverpresented him at his departure with a staff on the golden handle ofwhich a serpent twined round the sun. Zarathustra rejoiced on accountof the staff and supported himself thereon then spake he thus to hisdisciplesTell me pray how came gold to the highest value Because it isuncommon and unprofiting and beaming and soft in lustre it alwaysbestoweth itself.Only as image of the highest virtue came gold to the highest value.Goldlike beameth the glance of the bestower. Goldlustre maketh peacebetween moon and sun.Uncommon is the highest virtue and unprofiting beaming is it and softof lustre a bestowing virtue is the highest virtue.Verily I divine you well my disciples ye strive like me for thebestowing virtue. What should ye have in common with cats and wolvesIt is your thirst to become sacrifices and gifts yourselves andtherefore have ye the thirst to accumulate all riches in your soul.Insatiably striveth your soul for treasures and jewels because yourvirtue is insatiable in desiring to bestow.Ye constrain all things to flow towards you and into you so that theyshall flow back again out of your fountain as the gifts of your love.Verily an appropriator of all values must such bestowing love becomebut healthy and holy call I this selfishness.Another selfishness is there an alltoopoor and hungry kind whichwould always stealthe selfishness of the sick the sickly selfishness.With the eye of the thief it looketh upon all that is lustrous with thecraving of hunger it measureth him who hath abundance and ever doth itprowl round the tables of bestowers.Sickness speaketh in such craving and invisible degeneration of asickly body speaketh the larcenous craving of this selfishness.Tell me my brother what do we think bad and worst of all Is it notDEGENERATIONAnd we always suspect degeneration when the bestowingsoul is lacking.Upward goeth our course from genera on to supergenera. But a horror tous is the degenerating sense which saith All for myself.Upward soareth our sense thus is it a simile of our body a simile ofan elevation. Such similes of elevations are the names of the virtues.Thus goeth the body through history a becomer and fighter. And thespiritwhat is it to the body Its fights and victories herald itscompanion and echo.Similes are all names of good and evil they do not speak out theyonly hint. A fool who seeketh knowledge from themGive heed my brethren to every hour when your spirit would speak insimiles there is the origin of your virtue.Elevated is then your body and raised up with its delight enrapturethit the spirit so that it becometh creator and valuer and lover andeverythings benefactor.When your heart overfloweth broad and full like the river a blessingand a danger to the lowlanders there is the origin of your virtue.When ye are exalted above praise and blame and your will would commandall things as a loving ones will there is the origin of your virtue.When ye despise pleasant things and the effeminate couch and cannotcouch far enough from the effeminate there is the origin of yourvirtue.When ye are willers of one will and when that change of every need isneedful to you there is the origin of your virtue.Verily a new good and evil is it Verily a new deep murmuring and thevoice of a new fountainPower is it this new virtue a ruling thought is it and around it asubtle soul a golden sun with the serpent of knowledge around it..Here paused Zarathustra awhile and looked lovingly on his disciples.Then he continued to speak thusand his voice had changedRemain true to the earth my brethren with the power of your virtueLet your bestowing love and your knowledge be devoted to be the meaningof the earth Thus do I pray and conjure you.Let it not fly away from the earthly and beat against eternal walls withits wings Ah there hath always been so much flownaway virtueLead like me the flownaway virtue back to the earthyea backto body and life that it may give to the earth its meaning a humanmeaningA hundred times hitherto hath spirit as well as virtue flown awayand blundered. Alas in our body dwelleth still all this delusion andblundering body and will hath it there become.A hundred times hitherto hath spirit as well as virtue attempted anderred. Yea an attempt hath man been. Alas much ignorance and errorhath become embodied in usNot only the rationality of millenniumsalso their madness breakethout in us. Dangerous is it to be an heir.Still fight we step by step with the giant Chance and over all mankindhath hitherto ruled nonsense the lackofsense.Let your spirit and your virtue be devoted to the sense of the earthmy brethren let the value of everything be determined anew by youTherefore shall ye be fighters Therefore shall ye be creatorsIntelligently doth the body purify itself attempting with intelligenceit exalteth itself to the discerners all impulses sanctify themselvesto the exalted the soul becometh joyful.Physician heal thyself then wilt thou also heal thy patient. Let it behis best cure to see with his eyes him who maketh himself whole.A thousand paths are there which have never yet been trodden a thousandsalubrities and hidden islands of life. Unexhausted and undiscovered isstill man and mans world.Awake and hearken ye lonesome ones From the future come winds withstealthy pinions and to fine ears good tidings are proclaimed.Ye lonesome ones of today ye seceding ones ye shall one day be apeople out of you who have chosen yourselves shall a chosen peopleariseand out of it the Superman.Verily a place of healing shall the earth become And already is a newodour diffused around it a salvationbringing odourand a new hope.When Zarathustra had spoken these words he paused like one who had notsaid his last word and long did he balance the staff doubtfully in hishand. At last he spake thusand his voice had changedI now go alone my disciples Ye also now go away and alone So will Ihave it.Verily I advise you depart from me and guard yourselves againstZarathustra And better still be ashamed of him Perhaps he hathdeceived you.The man of knowledge must be able not only to love his enemies but alsoto hate his friends.One requiteth a teacher badly if one remain merely a scholar. And whywill ye not pluck at my wreathYe venerate me but what if your veneration should some day collapseTake heed lest a statue crush youYe say ye believe in Zarathustra But of what account is ZarathustraYe are my believers but of what account are all believersYe had not yet sought yourselves then did ye find me. So do allbelievers therefore all belief is of so little account.Now do I bid you lose me and find yourselves and only when ye have alldenied me will I return unto you.Verily with other eyes my brethren shall I then seek my lost oneswith another love shall I then love you.And once again shall ye have become friends unto me and children of onehope then will I be with you for the third time to celebrate the greatnoontide with you.And it is the great noontide when man is in the middle of his coursebetween animal and Superman and celebrateth his advance to the eveningas his highest hope for it is the advance to a new morning.At such time will the downgoer bless himself that he should be anovergoer and the sun of his knowledge will be at noontide.DEAD ARE ALL THE GODS NOW DO WE DESIRE THE SUPERMAN TO LIVE.Letthis be our final will at the great noontideThus spake Zarathustra.THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA. SECOND PART.and only when ye have all denied me will I return unto you.Verily with other eyes my brethren shall I then seek my lost oneswith another love shall I then love you.ZARATHUSTRA I. TheBestowing Virtue.XXIII. THE CHILD WITH THE MIRROR.After this Zarathustra returned again into the mountains to the solitudeof his cave and withdrew himself from men waiting like a sower whohath scattered his seed. His soul however became impatient and full oflonging for those whom he loved because he had still much to give them.For this is hardest of all to close the open hand out of love and keepmodest as a giver.Thus passed with the lonesome one months and years his wisdom meanwhileincreased and caused him pain by its abundance.One morning however he awoke ere the rosy dawn and having meditatedlong on his couch at last spake thus to his heartWhy did I startle in my dream so that I awoke Did not a child come tome carrying a mirrorO Zarathustrasaid the child unto melook at thyself in themirrorBut when I looked into the mirror I shrieked and my heart throbbedfor not myself did I see therein but a devils grimace and derision.Verily all too well do I understand the dreams portent and monitionmy DOCTRINE is in danger tares want to be called wheatMine enemies have grown powerful and have disfigured the likeness ofmy doctrine so that my dearest ones have to blush for the gifts that Igave them.Lost are my friends the hour hath come for me to seek my lost onesWith these words Zarathustra started up not however like a person inanguish seeking relief but rather like a seer and a singer whom thespirit inspireth. With amazement did his eagle and serpent gaze uponhim for a coming bliss overspread his countenance like the rosy dawn.What hath happened unto me mine animalssaid Zarathustra. Am I nottransformed Hath not bliss come unto me like a whirlwindFoolish is my happiness and foolish things will it speak it is stilltoo youngso have patience with itWounded am I by my happiness all sufferers shall be physicians unto meTo my friends can I again go down and also to mine enemies Zarathustracan again speak and bestow and show his best love to his loved onesMy impatient love overfloweth in streamsdown towards sunrise andsunset. Out of silent mountains and storms of affliction rusheth mysoul into the valleys.Too long have I longed and looked into the distance. Too long hathsolitude possessed me thus have I unlearned to keep silence.Utterance have I become altogether and the brawling of a brook fromhigh rocks downward into the valleys will I hurl my speech.And let the stream of my love sweep into unfrequented channels Howshould a stream not finally find its way to the seaForsooth there is a lake in me sequestered and selfsufficing but thestream of my love beareth this along with it downto the seaNew paths do I tread a new speech cometh unto me tired have I becomelike all creatorsof the old tongues. No longer will my spirit walk onwornout soles.Too slowly runneth all speaking for meinto thy chariot O storm do Ileap And even thee will I whip with my spiteLike a cry and an huzza will I traverse wide seas till I find the HappyIsles where my friends sojournAnd mine enemies amongst them How I now love every one unto whom I maybut speak Even mine enemies pertain to my bliss.And when I want to mount my wildest horse then doth my spear alwayshelp me up best it is my foots ever ready servantThe spear which I hurl at mine enemies How grateful am I to mineenemies that I may at last hurl itToo great hath been the tension of my cloud twixt laughters oflightnings will I cast hailshowers into the depths.Violently will my breast then heave violently will it blow its stormover the mountains thus cometh its assuagement.Verily like a storm cometh my happiness and my freedom But mineenemies shall think that THE EVIL ONE roareth over their heads.Yea ye also my friends will be alarmed by my wild wisdom and perhapsye will flee therefrom along with mine enemies.Ah that I knew how to lure you back with shepherds flutes Ah thatmy lioness wisdom would learn to roar softly And much have we alreadylearned with one anotherMy wild wisdom became pregnant on the lonesome mountains on the roughstones did she bear the youngest of her young.Now runneth she foolishly in the arid wilderness and seeketh andseeketh the soft swardmine old wild wisdomOn the soft sward of your hearts my friendson your love would shefain couch her dearest oneThus spake Zarathustra.XXIV. IN THE HAPPY ISLES.The figs fall from the trees they are good and sweet and in fallingthe red skins of them break. A north wind am I to ripe figs.Thus like figs do these doctrines fall for you my friends imbibenow their juice and their sweet substance It is autumn all around andclear sky and afternoon.Lo what fulness is around us And out of the midst of superabundanceit is delightful to look out upon distant seas.Once did people say God when they looked out upon distant seas nowhowever have I taught you to say Superman.God is a conjecture but I do not wish your conjecturing to reach beyondyour creating will.Could ye CREATE a GodThen I pray you be silent about all Gods Butye could well create the Superman.Not perhaps ye yourselves my brethren But into fathers and forefathersof the Superman could ye transform yourselves and let that be your bestcreatingGod is a conjecture but I should like your conjecturing restricted tothe conceivable.Could ye CONCEIVE a GodBut let this mean Will to Truth unto youthat everything be transformed into the humanly conceivable the humanlyvisible the humanly sensible Your own discernment shall ye follow outto the endAnd what ye have called the world shall but be created by you yourreason your likeness your will your love shall it itself become Andverily for your bliss ye discerning onesAnd how would ye endure life without that hope ye discerning onesNeither in the inconceivable could ye have been born nor in theirrational.But that I may reveal my heart entirely unto you my friends IF therewere gods how could I endure it to be no God THEREFORE there are noGods.Yea I have drawn the conclusion now however doth it draw me.God is a conjecture but who could drink all the bitterness of thisconjecture without dying Shall his faith be taken from the creatingone and from the eagle his flights into eagleheightsGod is a thoughtit maketh all the straight crooked and all thatstandeth reel. What Time would be gone and all the perishable would bebut a lieTo think this is giddiness and vertigo to human limbs and even vomitingto the stomach verily the reeling sickness do I call it to conjecturesuch a thing.Evil do I call it and misanthropic all that teaching about the one andthe plenum and the unmoved and the sufficient and the imperishableAll the imperishablethats but a simile and the poets lie too much.But of time and of becoming shall the best similes speak a praise shallthey be and a justification of all perishablenessCreatingthat is the great salvation from suffering and lifesalleviation. But for the creator to appear suffering itself is neededand much transformation.Yea much bitter dying must there be in your life ye creators Thus areye advocates and justifiers of all perishableness.For the creator himself to be the newborn child he must alsobe willing to be the childbearer and endure the pangs of thechildbearer.Verily through a hundred souls went I my way and through a hundredcradles and birththroes. Many a farewell have I taken I know theheartbreaking last hours.But so willeth it my creating Will my fate. Or to tell you it morecandidly just such a fatewilleth my Will.All FEELING suffereth in me and is in prison but my WILLING evercometh to me as mine emancipator and comforter.Willing emancipateth that is the true doctrine of will andemancipationso teacheth you Zarathustra.No longer willing and no longer valuing and no longer creating Ahthat that great debility may ever be far from meAnd also in discerning do I feel only my wills procreating and evolvingdelight and if there be innocence in my knowledge it is because thereis will to procreation in it.Away from God and Gods did this will allure me what would there be tocreate if there wereGodsBut to man doth it ever impel me anew my fervent creative will thusimpelleth it the hammer to the stone.Ah ye men within the stone slumbereth an image for me the image of myvisions Ah that it should slumber in the hardest ugliest stoneNow rageth my hammer ruthlessly against its prison. From the stone flythe fragments whats that to meI will complete it for a shadow came unto methe stillest and lightestof all things once came unto meThe beauty of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. Ah my brethren Ofwhat account now arethe Gods to meThus spake Zarathustra.XXV. THE PITIFUL.My friends there hath arisen a satire on your friend BeholdZarathustra Walketh he not amongst us as if amongst animalsBut it is better said in this wise The discerning one walketh amongstmen AS amongst animals.Man himself is to the discerning one the animal with red cheeks.How hath that happened unto him Is it not because he hath had to beashamed too oftO my friends Thus speaketh the discerning one shame shameshamethat is the history of manAnd on that account doth the noble one enjoin upon himself not to abashbashfulness doth he enjoin on himself in presence of all sufferers.Verily I like them not the merciful ones whose bliss is in theirpity too destitute are they of bashfulness.If I must be pitiful I dislike to be called so and if I be so it ispreferably at a distance.Preferably also do I shroud my head and flee before being recognisedand thus do I bid you do my friendsMay my destiny ever lead unafflicted ones like you across my path andthose with whom I MAY have hope and repast and honey in commonVerily I have done this and that for the afflicted but somethingbetter did I always seem to do when I had learned to enjoy myselfbetter.Since humanity came into being man hath enjoyed himself too littlethat alone my brethren is our original sinAnd when we learn better to enjoy ourselves then do we unlearn best togive pain unto others and to contrive pain.Therefore do I wash the hand that hath helped the sufferer therefore doI wipe also my soul.For in seeing the sufferer sufferingthereof was I ashamed on accountof his shame and in helping him sorely did I wound his pride.Great obligations do not make grateful but revengeful and when a smallkindness is not forgotten it becometh a gnawing worm.Be shy in accepting Distinguish by acceptingthus do I advise thosewho have naught to bestow.I however am a bestower willingly do I bestow as friend to friends.Strangers however and the poor may pluck for themselves the fruitfrom my tree thus doth it cause less shame.Beggars however one should entirely do away with Verily it annoyethone to give unto them and it annoyeth one not to give unto them.And likewise sinners and bad consciences Believe me my friends thesting of conscience teacheth one to sting.The worst things however are the petty thoughts. Verily better tohave done evilly than to have thought pettilyTo be sure ye say The delight in petty evils spareth one many a greatevil deed. But here one should not wish to be sparing.Like a boil is the evil deed it itcheth and irritateth and breakethforthit speaketh honourably.Behold I am disease saith the evil deed that is its honourableness.But like infection is the petty thought it creepeth and hideth andwanteth to be nowhereuntil the whole body is decayed and withered bythe petty infection.To him however who is possessed of a devil I would whisper this wordin the ear Better for thee to rear up thy devil Even for thee thereis still a path to greatnessAh my brethren One knoweth a little too much about every one And manya one becometh transparent to us but still we can by no means penetratehim.It is difficult to live among men because silence is so difficult.And not to him who is offensive to us are we most unfair but to him whodoth not concern us at all.If however thou hast a suffering friend then be a restingplace forhis suffering like a hard bed however a campbed thus wilt thouserve him best.And if a friend doeth thee wrong then say I forgive thee what thouhast done unto me that thou hast done it unto THYSELF howeverhowcould I forgive thatThus speaketh all great love it surpasseth even forgiveness and pity.One should hold fast ones heart for when one letteth it go howquickly doth ones head run awayAh where in the world have there been greater follies than with thepitiful And what in the world hath caused more suffering than thefollies of the pitifulWoe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above theirpityThus spake the devil unto me once on a time Even God hath his hellit is his love for man.And lately did I hear him say these words God is dead of his pityfor man hath God died.So be ye warned against pity FROM THENCE there yet cometh unto men aheavy cloud Verily I understand weathersignsBut attend also to this word All great love is above all its pity forit seekethto create what is lovedMyself do I offer unto my love AND MY NEIGHBOUR AS MYSELFsuch isthe language of all creators.All creators however are hard.Thus spake Zarathustra.XXVI. THE PRIESTS.And one day Zarathustra made a sign to his disciples and spake thesewords unto themHere are priests but although they are mine enemies pass them quietlyand with sleeping swordsEven among them there are heroes many of them have suffered too muchso they want to make others suffer.Bad enemies are they nothing is more revengeful than their meekness.And readily doth he soil himself who toucheth them.But my blood is related to theirs and I want withal to see my bloodhonoured in theirs.And when they had passed a pain attacked Zarathustra but not long hadhe struggled with the pain when he began to speak thusIt moveth my heart for those priests. They also go against my taste butthat is the smallest matter unto me since I am among men.But I suffer and have suffered with them prisoners are they unto meand stigmatised ones. He whom they call Saviour put them in fettersIn fetters of false values and fatuous words Oh that some one wouldsave them from their SaviourOn an isle they once thought they had landed when the sea tossed themabout but behold it was a slumbering monsterFalse values and fatuous words these are the worst monsters formortalslong slumbereth and waiteth the fate that is in them.But at last it cometh and awaketh and devoureth and engulfeth whateverhath built tabernacles upon it.Oh just look at those tabernacles which those priests have builtthemselves Churches they call their sweetsmelling cavesOh that falsified light that mustified air Where the soulmay notfly aloft to its heightBut so enjoineth their belief On your knees up the stair yesinnersVerily rather would I see a shameless one than the distorted eyes oftheir shame and devotionWho created for themselves such caves and penitencestairs Was it notthose who sought to conceal themselves and were ashamed under the clearskyAnd only when the clear sky looketh again through ruined roofs and downupon grass and red poppies on ruined wallswill I again turn my heartto the seats of this God.They called God that which opposed and afflicted them and verily therewas much herospirit in their worshipAnd they knew not how to love their God otherwise than by nailing men tothe crossAs corpses they thought to live in black draped they their corpseseven in their talk do I still feel the evil flavour of charnelhouses.And he who liveth nigh unto them liveth nigh unto black pools whereinthe toad singeth his song with sweet gravity.Better songs would they have to sing for me to believe in theirSaviour more like saved ones would his disciples have to appear untomeNaked would I like to see them for beauty alone should preachpenitence. But whom would that disguised affliction convinceVerily their Saviours themselves came not from freedom and freedomsseventh heaven Verily they themselves never trod the carpets ofknowledgeOf defects did the spirit of those Saviours consist but into everydefect had they put their illusion their stopgap which they calledGod.In their pity was their spirit drowned and when they swelled andoerswelled with pity there always floated to the surface a greatfolly.Eagerly and with shouts drove they their flock over their footbridgeas if there were but one footbridge to the future Verily thoseshepherds also were still of the flockSmall spirits and spacious souls had those shepherds but my brethrenwhat small domains have even the most spacious souls hitherto beenCharacters of blood did they write on the way they went and their follytaught that truth is proved by blood.But blood is the very worst witness to truth blood tainteth the purestteaching and turneth it into delusion and hatred of heart.And when a person goeth through fire for his teachingwhat doth thatprove It is more verily when out of ones own burning cometh onesown teachingSultry heart and cold head where these meet there ariseth theblusterer the Saviour.Greater ones verily have there been and higherborn ones than thosewhom the people call Saviours those rapturous blusterersAnd by still greater ones than any of the Saviours must ye be saved mybrethren if ye would find the way to freedomNever yet hath there been a Superman. Naked have I seen both of themthe greatest man and the smallest manAlltoosimilar are they still to each other. Verily even the greatestfound IalltoohumanThus spake Zarathustra.XXVII. THE VIRTUOUS.With thunder and heavenly fireworks must one speak to indolent andsomnolent senses.But beautys voice speaketh gently it appealeth only to the mostawakened souls.Gently vibrated and laughed unto me today my buckler it was beautysholy laughing and thrilling.At you ye virtuous ones laughed my beauty today. And thus came itsvoice unto me They wantto be paid besidesYe want to be paid besides ye virtuous ones Ye want reward for virtueand heaven for earth and eternity for your todayAnd now ye upbraid me for teaching that there is no rewardgivernor paymaster And verily I do not even teach that virtue is its ownreward.Ah this is my sorrow into the basis of things have reward andpunishment been insinuatedand now even into the basis of your soulsye virtuous onesBut like the snout of the boar shall my word grub up the basis of yoursouls a ploughshare will I be called by you.All the secrets of your heart shall be brought to light and when yelie in the sun grubbed up and broken then will also your falsehood beseparated from your truth.For this is your truth ye are TOO PURE for the filth of the wordsvengeance punishment recompense retribution.Ye love your virtue as a mother loveth her child but when did one hearof a mother wanting to be paid for her loveIt is your dearest Self your virtue. The rings thirst is in you toreach itself again struggleth every ring and turneth itself.And like the star that goeth out so is every work of your virtue everis its light on its way and travellingand when will it cease to be onits wayThus is the light of your virtue still on its way even when its workis done. Be it forgotten and dead still its ray of light liveth andtravelleth.That your virtue is your Self and not an outward thing a skin ora cloak that is the truth from the basis of your souls ye virtuousonesBut sure enough there are those to whom virtue meaneth writhing underthe lash and ye have hearkened too much unto their cryingAnd others are there who call virtue the slothfulness of their vicesand when once their hatred and jealousy relax the limbs their justice becometh lively and rubbeth its sleepy eyes.And others are there who are drawn downwards their devils draw them.But the more they sink the more ardently gloweth their eye and thelonging for their God.Ah their crying also hath reached your ears ye virtuous ones What Iam NOT that that is God to me and virtueAnd others are there who go along heavily and creakingly like cartstaking stones downhill they talk much of dignity and virtuetheir dragthey call virtueAnd others are there who are like eightday clocks when wound up theytick and want people to call tickingvirtue.Verily in those have I mine amusement wherever I find such clocks Ishall wind them up with my mockery and they shall even whirr therebyAnd others are proud of their modicum of righteousness and for the sakeof it do violence to all things so that the world is drowned in theirunrighteousness.Ah how ineptly cometh the word virtue out of their mouth And whenthey say I am just it always soundeth like I am justrevengedWith their virtues they want to scratch out the eyes of their enemiesand they elevate themselves only that they may lower others.And again there are those who sit in their swamp and speak thus fromamong the bulrushes Virtuethat is to sit quietly in the swamp.We bite no one and go out of the way of him who would bite and in allmatters we have the opinion that is given us.And again there are those who love attitudes and think that virtue is asort of attitude.Their knees continually adore and their hands are eulogies of virtuebut their heart knoweth naught thereof.And again there are those who regard it as virtue to say Virtueis necessary but after all they believe only that policemen arenecessary.And many a one who cannot see mens loftiness calleth it virtue to seetheir baseness far too well thus calleth he his evil eye virtue.And some want to be edified and raised up and call it virtue andothers want to be cast downand likewise call it virtue.And thus do almost all think that they participate in virtue and atleast every one claimeth to be an authority on good and evil.But Zarathustra came not to say unto all those liars and fools What doYE know of virtue What COULD ye know of virtueBut that ye my friends might become weary of the old words which yehave learned from the fools and liarsThat ye might become weary of the words reward retribution punishment righteous vengeance.That ye might become weary of saying That an action is good is becauseit is unselfish.Ah my friends That YOUR very Self be in your action as the mother isin the child let that be YOUR formula of virtueVerily I have taken from you a hundred formulae and your virtuesfavourite playthings and now ye upbraid me as children upbraid.They played by the seathen came there a wave and swept theirplaythings into the deep and now do they cry.But the same wave shall bring them new playthings and spread beforethem new speckled shellsThus will they be comforted and like them shall ye also my friendshave your comfortingand new speckled shellsThus spake Zarathustra.XXVIII. THE RABBLE.Life is a well of delight but where the rabble also drink there allfountains are poisoned.To everything cleanly am I well disposed but I hate to see the grinningmouths and the thirst of the unclean.They cast their eye down into the fountain and now glanceth up to metheir odious smile out of the fountain.The holy water have they poisoned with their lustfulness and when theycalled their filthy dreams delight then poisoned they also the words.Indignant becometh the flame when they put their damp hearts to thefire the spirit itself bubbleth and smoketh when the rabble approachthe fire.Mawkish and overmellow becometh the fruit in their hands unsteady andwithered at the top doth their look make the fruittree.And many a one who hath turned away from life hath only turned awayfrom the rabble he hated to share with them fountain flame and fruit.And many a one who hath gone into the wilderness and suffered thirstwith beasts of prey disliked only to sit at the cistern with filthycameldrivers.And many a one who hath come along as a destroyer and as a hailstormto all cornfields wanted merely to put his foot into the jaws of therabble and thus stop their throat.And it is not the mouthful which hath most choked me to know that lifeitself requireth enmity and death and torturecrossesBut I asked once and suffocated almost with my question What is therabble also NECESSARY for lifeAre poisoned fountains necessary and stinking fires and filthy dreamsand maggots in the bread of lifeNot my hatred but my loathing gnawed hungrily at my life Ah ofttimesbecame I weary of spirit when I found even the rabble spiritualAnd on the rulers turned I my back when I saw what they now callruling to traffic and bargain for powerwith the rabbleAmongst peoples of a strange language did I dwell with stopped ears sothat the language of their trafficking might remain strange unto me andtheir bargaining for power.And holding my nose I went morosely through all yesterdays and todaysverily badly smell all yesterdays and todays of the scribbling rabbleLike a cripple become deaf and blind and dumbthus have I lived longthat I might not live with the powerrabble the scriberabble and thepleasurerabble.Toilsomely did my spirit mount stairs and cautiously alms of delightwere its refreshment on the staff did life creep along with the blindone.What hath happened unto me How have I freed myself from loathingWho hath rejuvenated mine eye How have I flown to the height where norabble any longer sit at the wellsDid my loathing itself create for me wings and fountaindivining powersVerily to the loftiest height had I to fly to find again the well ofdelightOh I have found it my brethren Here on the loftiest height bubblethup for me the well of delight And there is a life at whose waters noneof the rabble drink with meAlmost too violently dost thou flow for me thou fountain of delightAnd often emptiest thou the goblet again in wanting to fill itAnd yet must I learn to approach thee more modestly far too violentlydoth my heart still flow towards theeMy heart on which my summer burneth my short hot melancholyoverhappy summer how my summer heart longeth for thy coolnessPast the lingering distress of my spring Past the wickedness of mysnowflakes in June Summer have I become entirely and summernoontideA summer on the loftiest height with cold fountains and blissfulstillness oh come my friends that the stillness may become moreblissfulFor this is OUR height and our home too high and steep do we here dwellfor all uncleanly ones and their thirst.Cast but your pure eyes into the well of my delight my friends Howcould it become turbid thereby It shall laugh back to you with ITSpurity.On the tree of the future build we our nest eagles shall bring us loneones food in their beaksVerily no food of which the impure could be fellowpartakers Firewould they think they devoured and burn their mouthsVerily no abodes do we here keep ready for the impure An icecave totheir bodies would our happiness be and to their spiritsAnd as strong winds will we live above them neighbours to the eaglesneighbours to the snow neighbours to the sun thus live the strongwinds.And like a wind will I one day blow amongst them and with my spirittake the breath from their spirit thus willeth my future.Verily a strong wind is Zarathustra to all low places and this counselcounselleth he to his enemies and to whatever spitteth and spewethTake care not to spit AGAINST the windThus spake Zarathustra.XXIX. THE TARANTULAS.Lo this is the tarantulas den Wouldst thou see the tarantula itselfHere hangeth its web touch this so that it may tremble.There cometh the tarantula willingly Welcome tarantula Black on thyback is thy triangle and symbol and I know also what is in thy soul.Revenge is in thy soul wherever thou bitest there ariseth black scabwith revenge thy poison maketh the soul giddyThus do I speak unto you in parable ye who make the soul giddyye preachers of EQUALITY Tarantulas are ye unto me and secretlyrevengeful onesBut I will soon bring your hidingplaces to the light therefore do Ilaugh in your face my laughter of the height.Therefore do I tear at your web that your rage may lure you out of yourden of lies and that your revenge may leap forth from behind your wordjustice.Because FOR MAN TO BE REDEEMED FROM REVENGEthat is for me the bridgeto the highest hope and a rainbow after long storms.Otherwise however would the tarantulas have it. Let it bevery justice for the world to become full of the storms of ourvengeancethus do they talk to one another.Vengeance will we use and insult against all who are not likeusthus do the tarantulahearts pledge themselves.And Will to Equalitythat itself shall henceforth be the name ofvirtue and against all that hath power will we raise an outcryYe preachers of equality the tyrantfrenzy of impotence crieth thus inyou for equality your most secret tyrantlongings disguise themselvesthus in virtuewordsFretted conceit and suppressed envyperhaps your fathers conceit andenvy in you break they forth as flame and frenzy of vengeance.What the father hath hid cometh out in the son and oft have I found inthe son the fathers revealed secret.Inspired ones they resemble but it is not the heart that inspireththembut vengeance. And when they become subtle and cold it is notspirit but envy that maketh them so.Their jealousy leadeth them also into thinkers paths and this is thesign of their jealousythey always go too far so that their fatiguehath at last to go to sleep on the snow.In all their lamentations soundeth vengeance in all their eulogies ismaleficence and being judge seemeth to them bliss.But thus do I counsel you my friends distrust all in whom the impulseto punish is powerfulThey are people of bad race and lineage out of their countenances peerthe hangman and the sleuthhound.Distrust all those who talk much of their justice Verily in theirsouls not only honey is lacking.And when they call themselves the good and just forget not that forthem to be Pharisees nothing is lacking butpowerMy friends I will not be mixed up and confounded with others.There are those who preach my doctrine of life and are at the same timepreachers of equality and tarantulas.That they speak in favour of life though they sit in their den thesepoisonspiders and withdrawn from lifeis because they would therebydo injury.To those would they thereby do injury who have power at present forwith those the preaching of death is still most at home.Were it otherwise then would the tarantulas teach otherwise and theythemselves were formerly the best worldmaligners and hereticburners.With these preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded.For thus speaketh justice UNTO ME Men are not equal.And neither shall they become so What would be my love to the Supermanif I spake otherwiseOn a thousand bridges and piers shall they throng to the future andalways shall there be more war and inequality among them thus doth mygreat love make me speakInventors of figures and phantoms shall they be in their hostilitiesand with those figures and phantoms shall they yet fight with each otherthe supreme fightGood and evil and rich and poor and high and low and all names ofvalues weapons shall they be and sounding signs that life must againand again surpass itselfAloft will it build itself with columns and stairslife itself intoremote distances would it gaze and out towards blissful beautiesTHEREFORE doth it require elevationAnd because it requireth elevation therefore doth it require steps andvariance of steps and climbers To rise striveth life and in rising tosurpass itself.And just behold my friends Here where the tarantulas den is risethaloft an ancient temples ruinsjust behold it with enlightened eyesVerily he who here towered aloft his thoughts in stone knew as well asthe wisest ones about the secret of lifeThat there is struggle and inequality even in beauty and war for powerand supremacy that doth he here teach us in the plainest parable.How divinely do vault and arch here contrast in the struggle how withlight and shade they strive against each other the divinely strivingones.Thus steadfast and beautiful let us also be enemies my friendsDivinely will we strive AGAINST one anotherAlas There hath the tarantula bit me myself mine old enemy Divinelysteadfast and beautiful it hath bit me on the fingerPunishment must there be and justiceso thinketh it notgratuitously shall he here sing songs in honour of enmityYea it hath revenged itself And alas now will it make my soul alsodizzy with revengeThat I may NOT turn dizzy however bind me fast my friends to thispillar Rather will I be a pillarsaint than a whirl of vengeanceVerily no cyclone or whirlwind is Zarathustra and if he be a dancerhe is not at all a tarantuladancerThus spake Zarathustra.XXX. THE FAMOUS WISE ONES.The people have ye served and the peoples superstitionNOT thetruthall ye famous wise ones And just on that account did they payyou reverence.And on that account also did they tolerate your unbelief because itwas a pleasantry and a bypath for the people. Thus doth the master givefree scope to his slaves and even enjoyeth their presumptuousness.But he who is hated by the people as the wolf by the dogsis the freespirit the enemy of fetters the nonadorer the dweller in the woods.To hunt him out of his lairthat was always called sense of right bythe people on him do they still hound their sharpesttoothed dogs.For there the truth is where the people are Woe woe to the seekingonesthus hath it echoed through all time.Your people would ye justify in their reverence that called ye Will toTruth ye famous wise onesAnd your heart hath always said to itself From the people have I comefrom thence came to me also the voice of God.Stiffnecked and artful like the ass have ye always been as theadvocates of the people.And many a powerful one who wanted to run well with the people hathharnessed in front of his horsesa donkey a famous wise man.And now ye famous wise ones I would have you finally throw offentirely the skin of the lionThe skin of the beast of prey the speckled skin and the dishevelledlocks of the investigator the searcher and the conquerorAh for me to learn to believe in your conscientiousness ye wouldfirst have to break your venerating will.Conscientiousso call I him who goeth into Godforsaken wildernessesand hath broken his venerating heart.In the yellow sands and burnt by the sun he doubtless peereth thirstilyat the isles rich in fountains where life reposeth under shady trees.But his thirst doth not persuade him to become like those comfortableones for where there are oases there are also idols.Hungry fierce lonesome Godforsaken so doth the lionwill wishitself.Free from the happiness of slaves redeemed from Deities and adorationsfearless and fearinspiring grand and lonesome so is the will of theconscientious.In the wilderness have ever dwelt the conscientious the free spiritsas lords of the wilderness but in the cities dwell the wellfodderedfamous wise onesthe draughtbeasts.For always do they draw as assesthe PEOPLES cartsNot that I on that account upbraid them but serving ones do theyremain and harnessed ones even though they glitter in golden harness.And often have they been good servants and worthy of their hire. Forthus saith virtue If thou must be a servant seek him unto whom thyservice is most usefulThe spirit and virtue of thy master shall advance by thou being hisservant thus wilt thou thyself advance with his spirit and virtueAnd verily ye famous wise ones ye servants of the people Yeyourselves have advanced with the peoples spirit and virtueand thepeople by you To your honour do I say itBut the people ye remain for me even with your virtues the people withpurblind eyesthe people who know not what SPIRIT isSpirit is life which itself cutteth into life by its own torture dothit increase its own knowledgedid ye know that beforeAnd the spirits happiness is this to be anointed and consecrated withtears as a sacrificial victimdid ye know that beforeAnd the blindness of the blind one and his seeking and groping shallyet testify to the power of the sun into which he hath gazeddid yeknow that beforeAnd with mountains shall the discerning one learn to BUILD It isa small thing for the spirit to remove mountainsdid ye know thatbeforeYe know only the sparks of the spirit but ye do not see the anvil whichit is and the cruelty of its hammerVerily ye know not the spirits pride But still less could ye endurethe spirits humility should it ever want to speakAnd never yet could ye cast your spirit into a pit of snow ye are nothot enough for that Thus are ye unaware also of the delight of itscoldness.In all respects however ye make too familiar with the spirit and outof wisdom have ye often made an almshouse and a hospital for bad poets.Ye are not eagles thus have ye never experienced the happiness of thealarm of the spirit. And he who is not a bird should not camp aboveabysses.Ye seem to me lukewarm ones but coldly floweth all deep knowledge.Icecold are the innermost wells of the spirit a refreshment to hothands and handlers.Respectable do ye there stand and stiff and with straight backs yefamous wise onesno strong wind or will impelleth you.Have ye neer seen a sail crossing the sea rounded and inflated andtrembling with the violence of the windLike the sail trembling with the violence of the spirit doth my wisdomcross the seamy wild wisdomBut ye servants of the people ye famous wise oneshow COULD ye go withmeThus spake Zarathustra.XXXI. THE NIGHTSONG.Tis night now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul alsois a gushing fountain.Tis night now only do all songs of the loving ones awake. And my soulalso is the song of a loving one.Something unappeased unappeasable is within me it longeth to findexpression. A craving for love is within me which speaketh itself thelanguage of love.Light am I ah that I were night But it is my lonesomeness to bebegirt with lightAh that I were dark and nightly How would I suck at the breasts oflightAnd you yourselves would I bless ye twinkling starlets and glowwormsaloftand would rejoice in the gifts of your light.But I live in mine own light I drink again into myself the flames thatbreak forth from me.I know not the happiness of the receiver and oft have I dreamt thatstealing must be more blessed than receiving.It is my poverty that my hand never ceaseth bestowing it is mine envythat I see waiting eyes and the brightened nights of longing.Oh the misery of all bestowers Oh the darkening of my sun Oh thecraving to crave Oh the violent hunger in satietyThey take from me but do I yet touch their soul There is a gap twixtgiving and receiving and the smallest gap hath finally to be bridgedover.A hunger ariseth out of my beauty I should like to injure those Iillumine I should like to rob those I have giftedthus do I hungerfor wickedness.Withdrawing my hand when another hand already stretcheth out to ithesitating like the cascade which hesitateth even in its leapthus doI hunger for wickednessSuch revenge doth mine abundance think of such mischief welleth out ofmy lonesomeness.My happiness in bestowing died in bestowing my virtue became weary ofitself by its abundanceHe who ever bestoweth is in danger of losing his shame to him who everdispenseth the hand and heart become callous by very dispensing.Mine eye no longer overfloweth for the shame of suppliants my hand hathbecome too hard for the trembling of filled hands.Whence have gone the tears of mine eye and the down of my heart Ohthe lonesomeness of all bestowers Oh the silence of all shining onesMany suns circle in desert space to all that is dark do they speak withtheir lightbut to me they are silent.Oh this is the hostility of light to the shining one unpityingly dothit pursue its course.Unfair to the shining one in its innermost heart cold to thesunsthus travelleth every sun.Like a storm do the suns pursue their courses that is their travelling.Their inexorable will do they follow that is their coldness.Oh ye only is it ye dark nightly ones that extract warmth from theshining ones Oh ye only drink milk and refreshment from the lightsuddersAh there is ice around me my hand burneth with the iciness Ah thereis thirst in me it panteth after your thirstTis night alas that I have to be light And thirst for the nightlyAnd lonesomenessTis night now doth my longing break forth in me as a fountainforspeech do I long.Tis night now do all gushing fountains speak louder. And my soul alsois a gushing fountain.Tis night now do all songs of loving ones awake. And my soul also isthe song of a loving one.Thus sang Zarathustra.XXXII. THE DANCESONG.One evening went Zarathustra and his disciples through the forest andwhen he sought for a well lo he lighted upon a green meadow peacefullysurrounded with trees and bushes where maidens were dancing together.As soon as the maidens recognised Zarathustra they ceased dancingZarathustra however approached them with friendly mien and spake thesewordsCease not your dancing ye lovely maidens No gamespoiler hath come toyou with evil eye no enemy of maidens.Gods advocate am I with the devil he however is the spirit ofgravity. How could I ye lightfooted ones be hostile to divine dancesOr to maidens feet with fine anklesTo be sure I am a forest and a night of dark trees but he who is notafraid of my darkness will find banks full of roses under my cypresses.And even the little God may he find who is dearest to maidens besidethe well lieth he quietly with closed eyes.Verily in broad daylight did he fall asleep the sluggard Had heperhaps chased butterflies too muchUpbraid me not ye beautiful dancers when I chasten the little Godsomewhat He will cry certainly and weepbut he is laughable evenwhen weepingAnd with tears in his eyes shall he ask you for a dance and I myselfwill sing a song to his danceA dancesong and satire on the spirit of gravity my supremestpowerfulest devil who is said to be lord of the world.And this is the song that Zarathustra sang when Cupid and the maidensdanced togetherOf late did I gaze into thine eye O Life And into the unfathomable didI there seem to sink.But thou pulledst me out with a golden angle derisively didst thoulaugh when I called thee unfathomable.Such is the language of all fish saidst thou what THEY do notfathom is unfathomable.But changeable am I only and wild and altogether a woman and novirtuous oneThough I be called by you men the profound one or the faithful onethe eternal one the mysterious one.But ye men endow us always with your own virtuesalas ye virtuousonesThus did she laugh the unbelievable one but never do I believe her andher laughter when she speaketh evil of herself.And when I talked face to face with my wild Wisdom she said to meangrily Thou willest thou cravest thou lovest on that account alonedost thou PRAISE LifeThen had I almost answered indignantly and told the truth to the angryone and one cannot answer more indignantly than when one telleth thetruth to ones Wisdom.For thus do things stand with us three. In my heart do I love onlyLifeand verily most when I hate herBut that I am fond of Wisdom and often too fond is because sheremindeth me very strongly of LifeShe hath her eye her laugh and even her golden anglerod am Iresponsible for it that both are so alikeAnd when once Life asked me Who is she then this Wisdomthen saidI eagerly Ah yes WisdomOne thirsteth for her and is not satisfied one looketh through veilsone graspeth through nets.Is she beautiful What do I know But the oldest carps are still luredby her.Changeable is she and wayward often have I seen her bite her lip andpass the comb against the grain of her hair.Perhaps she is wicked and false and altogether a woman but when shespeaketh ill of herself just then doth she seduce most.When I had said this unto Life then laughed she maliciously and shuther eyes. Of whom dost thou speak said she. Perhaps of meAnd if thou wert rightis it proper to say THAT in such wise to myface But now pray speak also of thy WisdomAh and now hast thou again opened thine eyes O beloved Life And intothe unfathomable have I again seemed to sink.Thus sang Zarathustra. But when the dance was over and the maidens haddeparted he became sad.The sun hath been long set said he at last the meadow is damp andfrom the forest cometh coolness.An unknown presence is about me and gazeth thoughtfully. What Thoulivest still ZarathustraWhy Wherefore Whereby Whither Where How Is it not folly still toliveAh my friends the evening is it which thus interrogateth in me.Forgive me my sadnessEvening hath come on forgive me that evening hath come onThus sang Zarathustra.XXXIII. THE GRAVESONG.Yonder is the graveisland the silent isle yonder also are the gravesof my youth. Thither will I carry an evergreen wreath of life.Resolving thus in my heart did I sail oer the sea.Oh ye sights and scenes of my youth Oh all ye gleams of love yedivine fleeting gleams How could ye perish so soon for me I think ofyou today as my dead ones.From you my dearest dead ones cometh unto me a sweet savourheartopening and melting. Verily it convulseth and openeth the heartof the lone seafarer.Still am I the richest and most to be enviedI the lonesomest oneFor I HAVE POSSESSED you and ye possess me still. Tell me to whom haththere ever fallen such rosy apples from the tree as have fallen unto meStill am I your loves heir and heritage blooming to your memory withmanyhued wildgrowing virtues O ye dearest onesAh we were made to remain nigh unto each other ye kindly strangemarvels and not like timid birds did ye come to me and my longingnaybut as trusting ones to a trusting oneYea made for faithfulness like me and for fond eternities must I nowname you by your faithlessness ye divine glances and fleeting gleamsno other name have I yet learnt.Verily too early did ye die for me ye fugitives. Yet did ye not fleefrom me nor did I flee from you innocent are we to each other in ourfaithlessness.To kill ME did they strangle you ye singing birds of my hopes Yea atyou ye dearest ones did malice ever shoot its arrowsto hit my heartAnd they hit it Because ye were always my dearest my possession and mypossessedness ON THAT ACCOUNT had ye to die young and far too earlyAt my most vulnerable point did they shoot the arrownamely at youwhose skin is like downor more like the smile that dieth at a glanceBut this word will I say unto mine enemies What is all manslaughter incomparison with what ye have done unto meWorse evil did ye do unto me than all manslaughter the irretrievabledid ye take from methus do I speak unto you mine enemiesSlew ye not my youths visions and dearest marvels My playmates took yefrom me the blessed spirits To their memory do I deposit this wreathand this curse.This curse upon you mine enemies Have ye not made mine eternal shortas a tone dieth away in a cold night Scarcely as the twinkle of divineeyes did it come to meas a fleeting gleamThus spake once in a happy hour my purity Divine shall everything beunto me.Then did ye haunt me with foul phantoms ah whither hath that happyhour now fledAll days shall be holy unto meso spake once the wisdom of my youthverily the language of a joyous wisdomBut then did ye enemies steal my nights and sold them to sleeplesstorture ah whither hath that joyous wisdom now fledOnce did I long for happy auspices then did ye lead an owlmonsteracross my path an adverse sign. Ah whither did my tender longing thenfleeAll loathing did I once vow to renounce then did ye change my nigh onesand nearest ones into ulcerations. Ah whither did my noblest vow thenfleeAs a blind one did I once walk in blessed ways then did ye castfilth on the blind ones course and now is he disgusted with the oldfootpath.And when I performed my hardest task and celebrated the triumph ofmy victories then did ye make those who loved me call out that I thengrieved them most.Verily it was always your doing ye embittered to me my best honey andthe diligence of my best bees.To my charity have ye ever sent the most impudent beggars around mysympathy have ye ever crowded the incurably shameless. Thus have yewounded the faith of my virtue.And when I offered my holiest as a sacrifice immediately did yourpiety put its fatter gifts beside it so that my holiest suffocated inthe fumes of your fat.And once did I want to dance as I had never yet danced beyond allheavens did I want to dance. Then did ye seduce my favourite minstrel.And now hath he struck up an awful melancholy air alas he tooted as amournful horn to mine earMurderous minstrel instrument of evil most innocent instrumentAlready did I stand prepared for the best dance then didst thou slay myrapture with thy tonesOnly in the dance do I know how to speak the parable of the highestthingsand now hath my grandest parable remained unspoken in my limbsUnspoken and unrealised hath my highest hope remained And there haveperished for me all the visions and consolations of my youthHow did I ever bear it How did I survive and surmount such wounds Howdid my soul rise again out of those sepulchresYea something invulnerable unburiable is with me something that wouldrend rocks asunder it is called MY WILL. Silently doth it proceed andunchanged throughout the years.Its course will it go upon my feet mine old Will hard of heart is itsnature and invulnerable.Invulnerable am I only in my heel. Ever livest thou there and art likethyself thou most patient one Ever hast thou burst all shackles of thetombIn thee still liveth also the unrealisedness of my youth and as lifeand youth sittest thou here hopeful on the yellow ruins of graves.Yea thou art still for me the demolisher of all graves Hail to theemy Will And only where there are graves are there resurrections.Thus sang Zarathustra.XXXIV. SELFSURPASSING.Will to Truth do ye call it ye wisest ones that which impelleth youand maketh you ardentWill for the thinkableness of all being thus do I call your willAll being would ye MAKE thinkable for ye doubt with good reason whetherit be already thinkable.But it shall accommodate and bend itself to you So willeth your will.Smooth shall it become and subject to the spirit as its mirror andreflection.That is your entire will ye wisest ones as a Will to Power and evenwhen ye speak of good and evil and of estimates of value.Ye would still create a world before which ye can bow the knee such isyour ultimate hope and ecstasy.The ignorant to be sure the peoplethey are like a river on which aboat floateth along and in the boat sit the estimates of value solemnand disguised.Your will and your valuations have ye put on the river of becoming itbetrayeth unto me an old Will to Power what is believed by the peopleas good and evil.It was ye ye wisest ones who put such guests in this boat and gavethem pomp and proud namesye and your ruling WillOnward the river now carrieth your boat it MUST carry it. A smallmatter if the rough wave foameth and angrily resisteth its keelIt is not the river that is your danger and the end of your good andevil ye wisest ones but that Will itself the Will to Powertheunexhausted procreating lifewill.But that ye may understand my gospel of good and evil for that purposewill I tell you my gospel of life and of the nature of all livingthings.The living thing did I follow I walked in the broadest and narrowestpaths to learn its nature.With a hundredfaced mirror did I catch its glance when its mouth wasshut so that its eye might speak unto me. And its eye spake unto me.But wherever I found living things there heard I also the language ofobedience. All living things are obeying things.And this heard I secondly Whatever cannot obey itself is commanded.Such is the nature of living things.This however is the third thing which I heardnamely that commandingis more difficult than obeying. And not only because the commanderbeareth the burden of all obeyers and because this burden readilycrusheth himAn attempt and a risk seemed all commanding unto me and whenever itcommandeth the living thing risketh itself thereby.Yea even when it commandeth itself then also must it atone for itscommanding. Of its own law must it become the judge and avenger andvictim.How doth this happen so did I ask myself. What persuadeth the livingthing to obey and command and even be obedient in commandingHearken now unto my word ye wisest ones Test it seriously whetherI have crept into the heart of life itself and into the roots of itsheartWherever I found a living thing there found I Will to Power and evenin the will of the servant found I the will to be master.That to the stronger the weaker shall servethereto persuadeth he hiswill who would be master over a still weaker one. That delight alone heis unwilling to forego.And as the lesser surrendereth himself to the greater that he may havedelight and power over the least of all so doth even the greatestsurrender himself and stakethlife for the sake of power.It is the surrender of the greatest to run risk and danger and playdice for death.And where there is sacrifice and service and loveglances there alsois the will to be master. By byways doth the weaker then slink intothe fortress and into the heart of the mightier oneand there stealethpower.And this secret spake Life herself unto me. Behold said she I amthat WHICH MUST EVER SURPASS ITSELF.To be sure ye call it will to procreation or impulse towards a goaltowards the higher remoter more manifold but all that is one and thesame secret.Rather would I succumb than disown this one thing and verily wherethere is succumbing and leaffalling lo there doth Life sacrificeitselffor powerThat I have to be struggle and becoming and purpose andcrosspurposeah he who divineth my will divineth well also on whatCROOKED paths it hath to treadWhatever I create and however much I love itsoon must I be adverseto it and to my love so willeth my will.And even thou discerning one art only a path and footstep of my willverily my Will to Power walketh even on the feet of thy Will to TruthHe certainly did not hit the truth who shot at it the formula Will toexistence that willdoth not existFor what is not cannot will that however which is in existencehowcould it still strive for existenceOnly where there is life is there also will not however Will toLife butso teach I theeWill to PowerMuch is reckoned higher than life itself by the living one but out ofthe very reckoning speakeththe Will to PowerThus did Life once teach me and thereby ye wisest ones do I solve youthe riddle of your hearts.Verily I say unto you good and evil which would be everlastingitdoth not exist Of its own accord must it ever surpass itself anew.With your values and formulae of good and evil ye exercise powerye valuing ones and that is your secret love and the sparklingtrembling and overflowing of your souls.But a stronger power groweth out of your values and a new surpassingby it breaketh egg and eggshell.And he who hath to be a creator in good and evilverily he hath firstto be a destroyer and break values in pieces.Thus doth the greatest evil pertain to the greatest good that howeveris the creating good.Let us SPEAK thereof ye wisest ones even though it be bad. To besilent is worse all suppressed truths become poisonous.And let everything break up whichcan break up by our truths Many ahouse is still to be builtThus spake Zarathustra.XXXV. THE SUBLIME ONES.Calm is the bottom of my sea who would guess that it hideth drollmonstersUnmoved is my depth but it sparkleth with swimming enigmas andlaughters.A sublime one saw I today a solemn one a penitent of the spirit Ohhow my soul laughed at his uglinessWith upraised breast and like those who draw in their breath thus didhe stand the sublime one and in silenceOerhung with ugly truths the spoil of his hunting and rich in tornraiment many thorns also hung on himbut I saw no rose.Not yet had he learned laughing and beauty. Gloomy did this hunterreturn from the forest of knowledge.From the fight with wild beasts returned he home but even yet a wildbeast gazeth out of his seriousnessan unconquered wild beastAs a tiger doth he ever stand on the point of springing but I do notlike those strained souls ungracious is my taste towards all thoseselfengrossed ones.And ye tell me friends that there is to be no dispute about taste andtasting But all life is a dispute about taste and tastingTaste that is weight at the same time and scales and weigher and alasfor every living thing that would live without dispute about weight andscales and weigherShould he become weary of his sublimeness this sublime one then onlywill his beauty beginand then only will I taste him and find himsavoury.And only when he turneth away from himself will he oerleap his ownshadowand verily into HIS sun.Far too long did he sit in the shade the cheeks of the penitent of thespirit became pale he almost starved on his expectations.Contempt is still in his eye and loathing hideth in his mouth. To besure he now resteth but he hath not yet taken rest in the sunshine.As the ox ought he to do and his happiness should smell of the earthand not of contempt for the earth.As a white ox would I like to see him which snorting and lowingwalketh before the ploughshare and his lowing should also laud allthat is earthlyDark is still his countenance the shadow of his hand danceth upon it.Oershadowed is still the sense of his eye.His deed itself is still the shadow upon him his doing obscureth thedoer. Not yet hath he overcome his deed.To be sure I love in him the shoulders of the ox but now do I want tosee also the eye of the angel.Also his herowill hath he still to unlearn an exalted one shall hebe and not only a sublime onethe ether itself should raise him thewillless oneHe hath subdued monsters he hath solved enigmas. But he should alsoredeem his monsters and enigmas into heavenly children should hetransform them.As yet hath his knowledge not learned to smile and to be withoutjealousy as yet hath his gushing passion not become calm in beauty.Verily not in satiety shall his longing cease and disappear but inbeauty Gracefulness belongeth to the munificence of the magnanimous.His arm across his head thus should the hero repose thus should healso surmount his repose.But precisely to the hero is BEAUTY the hardest thing of all.Unattainable is beauty by all ardent wills.A little more a little less precisely this is much here it is themost here.To stand with relaxed muscles and with unharnessed will that is thehardest for all of you ye sublime onesWhen power becometh gracious and descendeth into the visibleI callsuch condescension beauty.And from no one do I want beauty so much as from thee thou powerfulone let thy goodness be thy last selfconquest.All evil do I accredit to thee therefore do I desire of thee the good.Verily I have often laughed at the weaklings who think themselves goodbecause they have crippled pawsThe virtue of the pillar shalt thou strive after more beautiful dothit ever become and more gracefulbut internally harder and moresustainingthe higher it riseth.Yea thou sublime one one day shalt thou also be beautiful and hold upthe mirror to thine own beauty.Then will thy soul thrill with divine desires and there will beadoration even in thy vanityFor this is the secret of the soul when the hero hath abandoned itthen only approacheth it in dreamsthe superhero.Thus spake Zarathustra.XXXVI. THE LAND OF CULTURE.Too far did I fly into the future a horror seized upon me.And when I looked around me lo there time was my sole contemporary.Then did I fly backwards homewardsand always faster. Thus did I comeunto you ye presentday men and into the land of culture.For the first time brought I an eye to see you and good desire verilywith longing in my heart did I come.But how did it turn out with me Although so alarmedI had yet tolaugh Never did mine eye see anything so motleycolouredI laughed and laughed while my foot still trembled and my heart aswell. Here forsooth is the home of all the paintpotssaid I.With fifty patches painted on faces and limbsso sat ye there to mineastonishment ye presentday menAnd with fifty mirrors around you which flattered your play of coloursand repeated itVerily ye could wear no better masks ye presentday men than your ownfaces Who couldRECOGNISE youWritten all over with the characters of the past and these charactersalso pencilled over with new charactersthus have ye concealedyourselves well from all decipherersAnd though one be a trier of the reins who still believeth that ye havereins Out of colours ye seem to be baked and out of glued scraps.All times and peoples gaze diverscoloured out of your veils allcustoms and beliefs speak diverscoloured out of your gestures.He who would strip you of veils and wrappers and paints and gestureswould just have enough left to scare the crows.Verily I myself am the scared crow that once saw you naked and withoutpaint and I flew away when the skeleton ogled at me.Rather would I be a daylabourer in the netherworld and among theshades of the bygoneFatter and fuller than ye are forsooth thenetherworldlingsThis yea this is bitterness to my bowels that I can neither endureyou naked nor clothed ye presentday menAll that is unhomelike in the future and whatever maketh strayed birdsshiver is verily more homelike and familiar than your reality.For thus speak ye Real are we wholly and without faith andsuperstition thus do ye plume yourselvesalas even without plumesIndeed how would ye be ABLE to believe ye diverscoloured onesyewho are pictures of all that hath ever been believedPerambulating refutations are ye of belief itself and a dislocation ofall thought. UNTRUSTWORTHY ONES thus do I call you ye real onesAll periods prate against one another in your spirits and the dreamsand pratings of all periods were even realer than your awakenessUnfruitful are ye THEREFORE do ye lack belief. But he who had tocreate had always his presaging dreams and astral premonitionsandbelieved in believingHalfopen doors are ye at which gravediggers wait. And this is YOURreality Everything deserveth to perish.Alas how ye stand there before me ye unfruitful ones how lean yourribs And many of you surely have had knowledge thereof.Many a one hath said There hath surely a God filched something fromme secretly whilst I slept Verily enough to make a girl for himselftherefromAmazing is the poverty of my ribs thus hath spoken many a presentdayman.Yea ye are laughable unto me ye presentday men And especially whenye marvel at yourselvesAnd woe unto me if I could not laugh at your marvelling and had toswallow all that is repugnant in your plattersAs it is however I will make lighter of you since I have to carrywhat is heavy and what matter if beetles and Maybugs also alight onmy loadVerily it shall not on that account become heavier to me And not fromyou ye presentday men shall my great weariness arise.Ah whither shall I now ascend with my longing From all mountains do Ilook out for fatherlands and motherlands.But a home have I found nowhere unsettled am I in all cities anddecamping at all gates.Alien to me and a mockery are the presentday men to whom of late myheart impelled me and exiled am I from fatherlands and motherlands.Thus do I love only my CHILDRENS LAND the undiscovered in the remotestsea for it do I bid my sails search and search.Unto my children will I make amends for being the child of my fathersand unto all the futurefor THIS presentdayThus spake Zarathustra.XXXVII. IMMACULATE PERCEPTION.When yestereve the moon arose then did I fancy it about to bear a sunso broad and teeming did it lie on the horizon.But it was a liar with its pregnancy and sooner will I believe in theman in the moon than in the woman.To be sure little of a man is he also that timid nightreveller.Verily with a bad conscience doth he stalk over the roofs.For he is covetous and jealous the monk in the moon covetous of theearth and all the joys of lovers.Nay I like him not that tomcat on the roofs Hateful unto me are allthat slink around halfclosed windowsPiously and silently doth he stalk along on the starcarpetsbut Ilike no lighttreading human feet on which not even a spur jingleth.Every honest ones step speaketh the cat however stealeth along overthe ground. Lo catlike doth the moon come along and dishonestly.This parable speak I unto you sentimental dissemblers unto you thepure discerners You do I callcovetous onesAlso ye love the earth and the earthly I have divined you wellbutshame is in your love and a bad conscienceye are like the moonTo despise the earthly hath your spirit been persuaded but not yourbowels these however are the strongest in youAnd now is your spirit ashamed to be at the service of your bowels andgoeth byways and lying ways to escape its own shame.That would be the highest thing for meso saith your lying spiritunto itselfto gaze upon life without desire and not like the dogwith hangingout tongueTo be happy in gazing with dead will free from the grip and greedof selfishnesscold and ashygrey all over but with intoxicatedmooneyesThat would be the dearest thing to methus doth the seduced one seducehimselfto love the earth as the moon loveth it and with the eyeonly to feel its beauty.And this do I call IMMACULATE perception of all things to want nothingelse from them but to be allowed to lie before them as a mirror with ahundred facets.Oh ye sentimental dissemblers ye covetous ones Ye lack innocence inyour desire and now do ye defame desiring on that accountVerily not as creators as procreators or as jubilators do ye love theearthWhere is innocence Where there is will to procreation. And he whoseeketh to create beyond himself hath for me the purest will.Where is beauty Where I MUST WILL with my whole Will where I will loveand perish that an image may not remain merely an image.Loving and perishing these have rhymed from eternity. Will to lovethat is to be ready also for death. Thus do I speak unto you cowardsBut now doth your emasculated ogling profess to be contemplation And that which can be examined with cowardly eyes is to be christenedbeautiful Oh ye violators of noble namesBut it shall be your curse ye immaculate ones ye pure discerners thatye shall never bring forth even though ye lie broad and teeming on thehorizonVerily ye fill your mouth with noble words and we are to believe thatyour heart overfloweth ye cozenersBut MY words are poor contemptible stammering words gladly do I pickup what falleth from the table at your repasts.Yet still can I say therewith the truthto dissemblers Yea myfishbones shells and prickly leaves shalltickle the noses ofdissemblersBad air is always about you and your repasts your lascivious thoughtsyour lies and secrets are indeed in the airDare only to believe in yourselvesin yourselves and in your inwardparts He who doth not believe in himself always lieth.A Gods mask have ye hung in front of you ye pure ones into a Godsmask hath your execrable coiling snake crawled.Verily ye deceive ye contemplative ones Even Zarathustra was oncethe dupe of your godlike exterior he did not divine the serpents coilwith which it was stuffed.A Gods soul I once thought I saw playing in your games ye purediscerners No better arts did I once dream of than your artsSerpents filth and evil odour the distance concealed from me and thata lizards craft prowled thereabouts lasciviously.But I came NIGH unto you then came to me the dayand now cometh it toyouat an end is the moons love affairSee there Surprised and pale doth it standbefore the rosy dawnFor already she cometh the glowing oneHER love to the earth comethInnocence and creative desire is all solar loveSee there how she cometh impatiently over the sea Do ye not feel thethirst and the hot breath of her loveAt the sea would she suck and drink its depths to her height nowriseth the desire of the sea with its thousand breasts.Kissed and sucked WOULD it be by the thirst of the sun vapour WOULD itbecome and height and path of light and light itselfVerily like the sun do I love life and all deep seas.And this meaneth TO ME knowledge all that is deep shall ascendto myheightThus spake Zarathustra.XXXVIII. SCHOLARS.When I lay asleep then did a sheep eat at the ivywreath on myheadit ate and said thereby Zarathustra is no longer a scholar.It said this and went away clumsily and proudly. A child told it to me.I like to lie here where the children play beside the ruined wallamong thistles and red poppies.A scholar am I still to the children and also to the thistles and redpoppies. Innocent are they even in their wickedness.But to the sheep I am no longer a scholar so willeth my lotblessingsupon itFor this is the truth I have departed from the house of the scholarsand the door have I also slammed behind me.Too long did my soul sit hungry at their table not like them have I gotthe knack of investigating as the knack of nutcracking.Freedom do I love and the air over fresh soil rather would I sleep onoxskins than on their honours and dignities.I am too hot and scorched with mine own thought often is it ready totake away my breath. Then have I to go into the open air and away fromall dusty rooms.But they sit cool in the cool shade they want in everything to bemerely spectators and they avoid sitting where the sun burneth on thesteps.Like those who stand in the street and gape at the passersby thus dothey also wait and gape at the thoughts which others have thought.Should one lay hold of them then do they raise a dust like floursacksand involuntarily but who would divine that their dust came from cornand from the yellow delight of the summer fieldsWhen they give themselves out as wise then do their petty sayings andtruths chill me in their wisdom there is often an odour as if it camefrom the swamp and verily I have even heard the frog croak in itClever are theythey have dexterous fingers what doth MY simplicitypretend to beside their multiplicity All threading and knitting andweaving do their fingers understand thus do they make the hose of thespiritGood clockworks are they only be careful to wind them up properlyThen do they indicate the hour without mistake and make a modest noisethereby.Like millstones do they work and like pestles throw only seedcornunto themthey know well how to grind corn small and make white dustout of it.They keep a sharp eye on one another and do not trust each other thebest. Ingenious in little artifices they wait for those whose knowledgewalketh on lame feetlike spiders do they wait.I saw them always prepare their poison with precaution and always didthey put glass gloves on their fingers in doing so.They also know how to play with false dice and so eagerly did I findthem playing that they perspired thereby.We are alien to each other and their virtues are even more repugnant tomy taste than their falsehoods and false dice.And when I lived with them then did I live above them. Therefore didthey take a dislike to me.They want to hear nothing of any one walking above their heads and sothey put wood and earth and rubbish betwixt me and their heads.Thus did they deafen the sound of my tread and least have I hithertobeen heard by the most learned.All mankinds faults and weaknesses did they put betwixt themselves andmethey call it false ceiling in their houses.But nevertheless I walk with my thoughts ABOVE their heads and evenshould I walk on mine own errors still would I be above them and theirheads.For men are NOT equal so speaketh justice. And what I will THEY maynot willThus spake Zarathustra.XXXIX. POETS.Since I have known the body bettersaid Zarathustra to one of hisdisciplesthe spirit hath only been to me symbolically spirit and allthe imperishablethat is also but a simile.So have I heard thee say once before answered the disciple and thenthou addedst But the poets lie too much. Why didst thou say that thepoets lie too muchWhy said Zarathustra. Thou askest why I do not belong to those whomay be asked after their Why.Is my experience but of yesterday It is long ago that I experienced thereasons for mine opinions.Should I not have to be a cask of memory if I also wanted to have myreasons with meIt is already too much for me even to retain mine opinions and many abird flieth away.And sometimes also do I find a fugitive creature in my dovecote whichis alien to me and trembleth when I lay my hand upon it.But what did Zarathustra once say unto thee That the poets lie toomuchBut Zarathustra also is a poet.Believest thou that he there spake the truth Why dost thou believe itThe disciple answered I believe in Zarathustra. But Zarathustra shookhis head and smiled.Belief doth not sanctify me said he least of all the belief in myself.But granting that some one did say in all seriousness that the poets lietoo much he was rightWE do lie too much.We also know too little and are bad learners so we are obliged to lie.And which of us poets hath not adulterated his wine Many a poisonoushotchpotch hath evolved in our cellars many an indescribable thing haththere been done.And because we know little therefore are we pleased from the heart withthe poor in spirit especially when they are young womenAnd even of those things are we desirous which old women tell oneanother in the evening. This do we call the eternally feminine in us.And as if there were a special secret access to knowledge which CHOKETHUP for those who learn anything so do we believe in the people and intheir wisdom.This however do all poets believe that whoever pricketh up his earswhen lying in the grass or on lonely slopes learneth something of thethings that are betwixt heaven and earth.And if there come unto them tender emotions then do the poets alwaysthink that nature herself is in love with themAnd that she stealeth to their ear to whisper secrets into it andamorous flatteries of this do they plume and pride themselves beforeall mortalsAh there are so many things betwixt heaven and earth of which only thepoets have dreamedAnd especially ABOVE the heavens for all Gods are poetsymbolisationspoetsophisticationsVerily ever are we drawn aloftthat is to the realm of the cloudson these do we set our gaudy puppets and then call them Gods andSupermenAre not they light enough for those chairsall these Gods andSupermenAh how I am weary of all the inadequate that is insisted on as actualAh how I am weary of the poetsWhen Zarathustra so spake his disciple resented it but was silent. AndZarathustra also was silent and his eye directed itself inwardly as ifit gazed into the far distance. At last he sighed and drew breath.I am of today and heretofore said he thereupon but something is in methat is of the morrow and the day following and the hereafter.I became weary of the poets of the old and of the new superficial arethey all unto me and shallow seas.They did not think sufficiently into the depth therefore their feelingdid not reach to the bottom.Some sensation of voluptuousness and some sensation of tedium thesehave as yet been their best contemplation.Ghostbreathing and ghostwhisking seemeth to me all thejinglejangling of their harps what have they known hitherto of thefervour of tonesThey are also not pure enough for me they all muddle their water thatit may seem deep.And fain would they thereby prove themselves reconcilers but mediariesand mixers are they unto me and halfandhalf and impureAh I cast indeed my net into their sea and meant to catch good fishbut always did I draw up the head of some ancient God.Thus did the sea give a stone to the hungry one. And they themselves maywell originate from the sea.Certainly one findeth pearls in them thereby they are the more likehard molluscs. And instead of a soul I have often found in them saltslime.They have learned from the sea also its vanity is not the sea thepeacock of peacocksEven before the ugliest of all buffaloes doth it spread out its tailnever doth it tire of its lacefan of silver and silk.Disdainfully doth the buffalo glance thereat nigh to the sand with itssoul nigher still to the thicket nighest however to the swamp.What is beauty and sea and peacocksplendour to it This parable I speakunto the poets.Verily their spirit itself is the peacock of peacocks and a sea ofvanitySpectators seeketh the spirit of the poetshould they even bebuffaloesBut of this spirit became I weary and I see the time coming when itwill become weary of itself.Yea changed have I seen the poets and their glance turned towardsthemselves.Penitents of the spirit have I seen appearing they grew out of thepoets.Thus spake Zarathustra.XL. GREAT EVENTS.There is an isle in the seanot far from the Happy Isles ofZarathustraon which a volcano ever smoketh of which isle the peopleand especially the old women amongst them say that it is placed as arock before the gate of the netherworld but that through the volcanoitself the narrow way leadeth downwards which conducteth to this gate.Now about the time that Zarathustra sojourned on the Happy Isles ithappened that a ship anchored at the isle on which standeth the smokingmountain and the crew went ashore to shoot rabbits. About the noontidehour however when the captain and his men were together again theysaw suddenly a man coming towards them through the air and a voice saiddistinctly It is time It is the highest time But when the figurewas nearest to them it flew past quickly however like a shadow inthe direction of the volcano then did they recognise with the greatestsurprise that it was Zarathustra for they had all seen him beforeexcept the captain himself and they loved him as the people love insuch wise that love and awe were combined in equal degree.Behold said the old helmsman there goeth Zarathustra to hellAbout the same time that these sailors landed on the fireisle therewas a rumour that Zarathustra had disappeared and when his friends wereasked about it they said that he had gone on board a ship by nightwithout saying whither he was going.Thus there arose some uneasiness. After three days however there camethe story of the ships crew in addition to this uneasinessandthen did all the people say that the devil had taken Zarathustra. Hisdisciples laughed sure enough at this talk and one of them said evenSooner would I believe that Zarathustra hath taken the devil. But atthe bottom of their hearts they were all full of anxiety and longing sotheir joy was great when on the fifth day Zarathustra appeared amongstthem.And this is the account of Zarathustras interview with the firedogThe earth said he hath a skin and this skin hath diseases. One ofthese diseases for example is called man.And another of these diseases is called the firedog concerning HIMmen have greatly deceived themselves and let themselves be deceived.To fathom this mystery did I go oer the sea and I have seen the truthnaked verily barefooted up to the neck.Now do I know how it is concerning the firedog and likewise concerningall the spouting and subversive devils of which not only old women areafraid.Up with thee firedog out of thy depth cried I and confess howdeep that depth is Whence cometh that which thou snortest upThou drinkest copiously at the sea that doth thine embittered eloquencebetray In sooth for a dog of the depth thou takest thy nourishmenttoo much from the surfaceAt the most I regard thee as the ventriloquist of the earth and everwhen I have heard subversive and spouting devils speak I have foundthem like thee embittered mendacious and shallow.Ye understand how to roar and obscure with ashes Ye are the bestbraggarts and have sufficiently learned the art of making dregs boil.Where ye are there must always be dregs at hand and much that isspongy hollow and compressed it wanteth to have freedom.Freedom ye all roar most eagerly but I have unlearned the belief ingreat events when there is much roaring and smoke about them.And believe me friend Hullabaloo The greatest eventsare not ournoisiest but our stillest hours.Not around the inventors of new noise but around the inventors of newvalues doth the world revolve INAUDIBLY it revolveth.And just own to it Little had ever taken place when thy noise and smokepassed away. What if a city did become a mummy and a statue lay in themudAnd this do I say also to the oerthrowers of statues It is certainlythe greatest folly to throw salt into the sea and statues into the mud.In the mud of your contempt lay the statue but it is just its law thatout of contempt its life and living beauty grow againWith diviner features doth it now arise seducing by its suffering andverily it will yet thank you for oerthrowing it ye subvertersThis counsel however do I counsel to kings and churches and to allthat is weak with age or virtuelet yourselves be oerthrown That yemay again come to life and that virtuemay come to youThus spake I before the firedog then did he interrupt me sullenly andasked Church What is thatChurch answered I that is a kind of state and indeed the mostmendacious. But remain quiet thou dissembling dog Thou surely knowestthine own species bestLike thyself the state is a dissembling dog like thee doth it liketo speak with smoke and roaringto make believe like thee that itspeaketh out of the heart of things.For it seeketh by all means to be the most important creature on earththe state and people think it so.When I had said this the firedog acted as if mad with envy. What cried he the most important creature on earth And people think itso And so much vapour and terrible voices came out of his throat thatI thought he would choke with vexation and envy.At last he became calmer and his panting subsided as soon however ashe was quiet I said laughinglyThou art angry firedog so I am in the right about theeAnd that I may also maintain the right hear the story of anotherfiredog he speaketh actually out of the heart of the earth.Gold doth his breath exhale and golden rain so doth his heart desire.What are ashes and smoke and hot dregs to himLaughter flitteth from him like a variegated cloud adverse is he to thygargling and spewing and grips in the bowelsThe gold however and the laughterthese doth he take out of the heartof the earth for that thou mayst know itTHE HEART OF THE EARTH ISOF GOLD.When the firedog heard this he could no longer endure to listen to me.Abashed did he draw in his tail said bowwow in a cowed voice andcrept down into his cave.Thus told Zarathustra. His disciples however hardly listened to himso great was their eagerness to tell him about the sailors the rabbitsand the flying man.What am I to think of it said Zarathustra. Am I indeed a ghostBut it may have been my shadow. Ye have surely heard something of theWanderer and his ShadowOne thing however is certain I must keep a tighter hold of itotherwise it will spoil my reputation.And once more Zarathustra shook his head and wondered. What am I tothink of it said he once more.Why did the ghost cry It is time It is the highest timeFor what is it thenthe highest timeThus spake Zarathustra.XLI. THE SOOTHSAYER.And I saw a great sadness come over mankind. The best turned weary oftheir works.A doctrine appeared a faith ran beside it All is empty all is alikeall hath beenAnd from all hills there reechoed All is empty all is alike allhath beenTo be sure we have harvested but why have all our fruits become rottenand brown What was it fell last night from the evil moonIn vain was all our labour poison hath our wine become the evil eyehath singed yellow our fields and hearts.Arid have we all become and fire falling upon us then do we turn dustlike ashesyea the fire itself have we made aweary.All our fountains have dried up even the sea hath receded. All theground trieth to gape but the depth will not swallowAlas where is there still a sea in which one could be drowned sosoundeth our plaintacross shallow swamps.Verily even for dying have we become too weary now do we keep awakeand live onin sepulchres.Thus did Zarathustra hear a soothsayer speak and the foreboding touchedhis heart and transformed him. Sorrowfully did he go about and wearilyand he became like unto those of whom the soothsayer had spoken.Verily said he unto his disciples a little while and there cometh thelong twilight. Alas how shall I preserve my light through itThat it may not smother in this sorrowfulness To remoter worlds shallit be a light and also to remotest nightsThus did Zarathustra go about grieved in his heart and for three dayshe did not take any meat or drink he had no rest and lost his speech.At last it came to pass that he fell into a deep sleep. His discipleshowever sat around him in long nightwatches and waited anxiously tosee if he would awake and speak again and recover from his affliction.And this is the discourse that Zarathustra spake when he awoke hisvoice however came unto his disciples as from afarHear I pray you the dream that I dreamed my friends and help me todivine its meaningA riddle is it still unto me this dream the meaning is hidden in itand encaged and doth not yet fly above it on free pinions.All life had I renounced so I dreamed. Nightwatchman andgraveguardian had I become aloft in the lone mountainfortress ofDeath.There did I guard his coffins full stood the musty vaults of thosetrophies of victory. Out of glass coffins did vanquished life gaze uponme.The odour of dustcovered eternities did I breathe sultry anddustcovered lay my soul. And who could have aired his soul thereBrightness of midnight was ever around me lonesomeness cowered besideher and as a third deathrattle stillness the worst of my femalefriends.Keys did I carry the rustiest of all keys and I knew how to open withthem the most creaking of all gates.Like a bitterly angry croaking ran the sound through the long corridorswhen the leaves of the gate opened ungraciously did this bird cryunwillingly was it awakened.But more frightful even and more heartstrangling was it when it againbecame silent and still all around and I alone sat in that malignantsilence.Thus did time pass with me and slip by if time there still was whatdo I know thereof But at last there happened that which awoke me.Thrice did there peal peals at the gate like thunders thrice did thevaults resound and howl again then did I go to the gate.Alpa cried I who carrieth his ashes unto the mountain Alpa Alpa whocarrieth his ashes unto the mountainAnd I pressed the key and pulled at the gate and exerted myself. Butnot a fingersbreadth was it yet openThen did a roaring wind tear the folds apart whistling whizzing andpiercing it threw unto me a black coffin.And in the roaring and whistling and whizzing the coffin burst up andspouted out a thousand peals of laughter.And a thousand caricatures of children angels owls fools andchildsized butterflies laughed and mocked and roared at me.Fearfully was I terrified thereby it prostrated me. And I cried withhorror as I neer cried before.But mine own crying awoke meand I came to myself.Thus did Zarathustra relate his dream and then was silent for as yethe knew not the interpretation thereof. But the disciple whom he lovedmost arose quickly seized Zarathustras hand and saidThy life itself interpreteth unto us this dream O ZarathustraArt thou not thyself the wind with shrill whistling which bursteth openthe gates of the fortress of DeathArt thou not thyself the coffin full of manyhued malices andangelcaricatures of lifeVerily like a thousand peals of childrens laughter comethZarathustra into all sepulchres laughing at those nightwatchmen andgraveguardians and whoever else rattleth with sinister keys.With thy laughter wilt thou frighten and prostrate them fainting andrecovering will demonstrate thy power over them.And when the long twilight cometh and the mortal weariness even thenwilt thou not disappear from our firmament thou advocate of lifeNew stars hast thou made us see and new nocturnal glories verilylaughter itself hast thou spread out over us like a manyhued canopy.Now will childrens laughter ever from coffins flow now will a strongwind ever come victoriously unto all mortal weariness of this thou artthyself the pledge and the prophetVerily THEY THEMSELVES DIDST THOU DREAM thine enemies that was thysorest dream.But as thou awokest from them and camest to thyself so shall theyawaken from themselvesand come unto theeThus spake the disciple and all the others then thronged aroundZarathustra grasped him by the hands and tried to persuade him toleave his bed and his sadness and return unto them. Zarathustrahowever sat upright on his couch with an absent look. Like onereturning from long foreign sojourn did he look on his disciples andexamined their features but still he knew them not. When however theyraised him and set him upon his feet behold all on a sudden his eyechanged he understood everything that had happened stroked his beardand said with a strong voiceWell this hath just its time but see to it my disciples that wehave a good repast and without delay Thus do I mean to make amends forbad dreamsThe soothsayer however shall eat and drink at my side and verily Iwill yet show him a sea in which he can drown himselfThus spake Zarathustra. Then did he gaze long into the face of thedisciple who had been the dreaminterpreter and shook his head.XLII. REDEMPTION.When Zarathustra went one day over the great bridge then did thecripples and beggars surround him and a hunchback spake thus unto himBehold Zarathustra Even the people learn from thee and acquire faithin thy teaching but for them to believe fully in thee one thing isstill needfulthou must first of all convince us cripples Here hastthou now a fine selection and verily an opportunity with more than oneforelock The blind canst thou heal and make the lame run and fromhim who hath too much behind couldst thou well also take away alittlethat I think would be the right method to make the cripplesbelieve in ZarathustraZarathustra however answered thus unto him who so spake When onetaketh his hump from the hunchback then doth one take from him hisspiritso do the people teach. And when one giveth the blind man eyesthen doth he see too many bad things on the earth so that he cursethhim who healed him. He however who maketh the lame man run inflictethupon him the greatest injury for hardly can he run when his vicesrun away with himso do the people teach concerning cripples. And whyshould not Zarathustra also learn from the people when the people learnfrom ZarathustraIt is however the smallest thing unto me since I have been amongstmen to see one person lacking an eye another an ear and a third aleg and that others have lost the tongue or the nose or the head.I see and have seen worse things and divers things so hideous that Ishould neither like to speak of all matters nor even keep silent aboutsome of them namely men who lack everything except that they havetoo much of one thingmen who are nothing more than a big eye or a bigmouth or a big belly or something else bigreversed cripples I callsuch men.And when I came out of my solitude and for the first time passed overthis bridge then I could not trust mine eyes but looked again andagain and said at last That is an ear An ear as big as a man Ilooked still more attentivelyand actually there did move under the earsomething that was pitiably small and poor and slim. And in truth thisimmense ear was perched on a small thin stalkthe stalk however was aman A person putting a glass to his eyes could even recognise furthera small envious countenance and also that a bloated soullet dangled atthe stalk. The people told me however that the big ear was not only aman but a great man a genius. But I never believed in the people whenthey spake of great menand I hold to my belief that it was a reversedcripple who had too little of everything and too much of one thing.When Zarathustra had spoken thus unto the hunchback and unto those ofwhom the hunchback was the mouthpiece and advocate then did he turn tohis disciples in profound dejection and saidVerily my friends I walk amongst men as amongst the fragments andlimbs of human beingsThis is the terrible thing to mine eye that I find man broken up andscattered about as on a battle and butcherground.And when mine eye fleeth from the present to the bygone it findeth everthe same fragments and limbs and fearful chancesbut no menThe present and the bygone upon earthah my friendsthat is MY mostunbearable trouble and I should not know how to live if I were not aseer of what is to come.A seer a purposer a creator a future itself and a bridge to thefutureand alas also as it were a cripple on this bridge all that isZarathustra.And ye also asked yourselves often Who is Zarathustra to us Whatshall he be called by us And like me did ye give yourselves questionsfor answers.Is he a promiser Or a fulfiller A conqueror Or an inheritor Aharvest Or a ploughshare A physician Or a healed oneIs he a poet Or a genuine one An emancipator Or a subjugator A goodone Or an evil oneI walk amongst men as the fragments of the future that future which Icontemplate.And it is all my poetisation and aspiration to compose and collect intounity what is fragment and riddle and fearful chance.And how could I endure to be a man if man were not also the composerand riddlereader and redeemer of chanceTo redeem what is past and to transform every It was into Thus wouldI have itthat only do I call redemptionWillso is the emancipator and joybringer called thus have I taughtyou my friends But now learn this likewise the Will itself is still aprisoner.Willing emancipateth but what is that called which still putteth theemancipator in chainsIt was thus is the Wills teethgnashing and lonesomest tribulationcalled. Impotent towards what hath been doneit is a maliciousspectator of all that is past.Not backward can the Will will that it cannot break time and timesdesirethat is the Wills lonesomest tribulation.Willing emancipateth what doth Willing itself devise in order to getfree from its tribulation and mock at its prisonAh a fool becometh every prisoner Foolishly delivereth itself also theimprisoned Will.That time doth not run backwardthat is its animosity That whichwas so is the stone which it cannot roll called.And thus doth it roll stones out of animosity and illhumour and takethrevenge on whatever doth not like it feel rage and illhumour.Thus did the Will the emancipator become a torturer and on allthat is capable of suffering it taketh revenge because it cannot gobackward.This yea this alone is REVENGE itself the Wills antipathy to timeand its It was.Verily a great folly dwelleth in our Will and it became a curse untoall humanity that this folly acquired spiritTHE SPIRIT OF REVENGE my friends that hath hitherto been mans bestcontemplation and where there was suffering it was claimed there wasalways penalty.Penalty so calleth itself revenge. With a lying word it feigneth agood conscience.And because in the willer himself there is suffering because he cannotwill backwardsthus was Willing itself and all life claimedto bepenaltyAnd then did cloud after cloud roll over the spirit until at lastmadness preached Everything perisheth therefore everything deservethto perishAnd this itself is justice the law of timethat he must devour hischildren thus did madness preach.Morally are things ordered according to justice and penalty. Oh whereis there deliverance from the flux of things and from the existence ofpenalty Thus did madness preach.Can there be deliverance when there is eternal justice Alasunrollable is the stone It was eternal must also be all penalties Thus did madness preach.No deed can be annihilated how could it be undone by the penaltyThis this is what is eternal in the existence of penalty thatexistence also must be eternally recurring deed and guiltUnless the Will should at last deliver itself and Willing becomenonWilling but ye know my brethren this fabulous song of madnessAway from those fabulous songs did I lead you when I taught you TheWill is a creator.All It was is a fragment a riddle a fearful chanceuntil thecreating Will saith thereto But thus would I have it.Until the creating Will saith thereto But thus do I will it Thusshall I will itBut did it ever speak thus And when doth this take place Hath the Willbeen unharnessed from its own follyHath the Will become its own deliverer and joybringer Hath itunlearned the spirit of revenge and all teethgnashingAnd who hath taught it reconciliation with time and something higherthan all reconciliationSomething higher than all reconciliation must the Will will which is theWill to Power but how doth that take place Who hath taught it alsoto will backwardsBut at this point in his discourse it chanced that Zarathustrasuddenly paused and looked like a person in the greatest alarm. Withterror in his eyes did he gaze on his disciples his glances pierced aswith arrows their thoughts and arrearthoughts. But after a brief spacehe again laughed and said soothedlyIt is difficult to live amongst men because silence is so difficultespecially for a babbler.Thus spake Zarathustra. The hunchback however had listened to theconversation and had covered his face during the time but when he heardZarathustra laugh he looked up with curiosity and said slowlyBut why doth Zarathustra speak otherwise unto us than unto hisdisciplesZarathustra answered What is there to be wondered at With hunchbacksone may well speak in a hunchbacked wayVery good said the hunchback and with pupils one may well telltales out of school.But why doth Zarathustra speak otherwise unto his pupilsthan untohimselfXLIII. MANLY PRUDENCE.Not the height it is the declivity that is terribleThe declivity where the gaze shooteth DOWNWARDS and the hand graspethUPWARDS. There doth the heart become giddy through its double will.Ah friends do ye divine also my hearts double willThis this is MY declivity and my danger that my gaze shooteth towardsthe summit and my hand would fain clutch and leanon the depthTo man clingeth my will with chains do I bind myself to man becauseI am pulled upwards to the Superman for thither doth mine other willtend.And THEREFORE do I live blindly among men as if I knew them not thatmy hand may not entirely lose belief in firmness.I know not you men this gloom and consolation is often spread aroundme.I sit at the gateway for every rogue and ask Who wisheth to deceivemeThis is my first manly prudence that I allow myself to be deceived soas not to be on my guard against deceivers.Ah if I were on my guard against man how could man be an anchor to myball Too easily would I be pulled upwards and awayThis providence is over my fate that I have to be without foresight.And he who would not languish amongst men must learn to drink out ofall glasses and he who would keep clean amongst men must know how towash himself even with dirty water.And thus spake I often to myself for consolation Courage Cheer upold heart An unhappiness hath failed to befall thee enjoy that asthyhappinessThis however is mine other manly prudence I am more forbearing to theVAIN than to the proud.Is not wounded vanity the mother of all tragedies Where however prideis wounded there groweth up something better than pride.That life may be fair to behold its game must be well played for thatpurpose however it needeth good actors.Good actors have I found all the vain ones they play and wish peopleto be fond of beholding themall their spirit is in this wish.They represent themselves they invent themselves in theirneighbourhood I like to look upon lifeit cureth of melancholy.Therefore am I forbearing to the vain because they are the physiciansof my melancholy and keep me attached to man as to a drama.And further who conceiveth the full depth of the modesty of the vainman I am favourable to him and sympathetic on account of his modesty.From you would he learn his belief in himself he feedeth upon yourglances he eateth praise out of your hands.Your lies doth he even believe when you lie favourably about him for inits depths sigheth his heart What am IAnd if that be the true virtue which is unconscious of itselfwell thevain man is unconscious of his modestyThis is however my third manly prudence I am not put out of conceitwith the WICKED by your timorousness.I am happy to see the marvels the warm sun hatcheth tigers and palmsand rattlesnakes.Also amongst men there is a beautiful brood of the warm sun and muchthat is marvellous in the wicked.In truth as your wisest did not seem to me so very wise so found Ialso human wickedness below the fame of it.And oft did I ask with a shake of the head Why still rattle yerattlesnakesVerily there is still a future even for evil And the warmest south isstill undiscovered by man.How many things are now called the worst wickedness which are onlytwelve feet broad and three months long Some day however will greaterdragons come into the world.For that the Superman may not lack his dragon the superdragon thatis worthy of him there must still much warm sun glow on moist virginforestsOut of your wild cats must tigers have evolved and out of yourpoisontoads crocodiles for the good hunter shall have a good huntAnd verily ye good and just In you there is much to be laughed at andespecially your fear of what hath hitherto been called the devilSo alien are ye in your souls to what is great that to you the Supermanwould be FRIGHTFUL in his goodnessAnd ye wise and knowing ones ye would flee from the solarglow of thewisdom in which the Superman joyfully batheth his nakednessYe highest men who have come within my ken this is my doubt of you andmy secret laughter I suspect ye would call my Supermana devilAh I became tired of those highest and best ones from their height did I long to be up out and away to the SupermanA horror came over me when I saw those best ones naked then there grewfor me the pinions to soar away into distant futures.Into more distant futures into more southern souths than ever artistdreamed of thither where Gods are ashamed of all clothesBut disguised do I want to see YOU ye neighbours and fellowmen andwellattired and vain and estimable as the good and justAnd disguised will I myself sit amongst youthat I may MISTAKE you andmyself for that is my last manly prudence.Thus spake Zarathustra.XLIV. THE STILLEST HOUR.What hath happened unto me my friends Ye see me troubled drivenforth unwillingly obedient ready to goalas to go away from YOUYea once more must Zarathustra retire to his solitude but unjoyouslythis time doth the bear go back to his caveWhat hath happened unto me Who ordereth thisAh mine angry mistresswisheth it so she spake unto me. Have I ever named her name to youYesterday towards evening there spake unto me MY STILLEST HOUR that isthe name of my terrible mistress.And thus did it happenfor everything must I tell you that your heartmay not harden against the suddenly departing oneDo ye know the terror of him who falleth asleepTo the very toes he is terrified because the ground giveth way underhim and the dream beginneth.This do I speak unto you in parable. Yesterday at the stillest hour didthe ground give way under me the dream began.The hourhand moved on the timepiece of my life drew breathnever didI hear such stillness around me so that my heart was terrified.Then was there spoken unto me without voice THOU KNOWEST ITZARATHUSTRAAnd I cried in terror at this whispering and the blood left my facebut I was silent.Then was there once more spoken unto me without voice Thou knowest itZarathustra but thou dost not speak itAnd at last I answered like one defiant Yea I know it but I willnot speak itThen was there again spoken unto me without voice Thou WILT notZarathustra Is this true Conceal thyself not behind thy defianceAnd I wept and trembled like a child and said Ah I would indeed buthow can I do it Exempt me only from this It is beyond my powerThen was there again spoken unto me without voice What matter aboutthyself Zarathustra Speak thy word and succumbAnd I answered Ah is it MY word Who am I I await the worthierone I am not worthy even to succumb by it.Then was there again spoken unto me without voice What matter aboutthyself Thou art not yet humble enough for me. Humility hath thehardest skin.And I answered What hath not the skin of my humility endured At thefoot of my height do I dwell how high are my summits no one hath yettold me. But well do I know my valleys.Then was there again spoken unto me without voice O Zarathustra hewho hath to remove mountains removeth also valleys and plains.And I answered As yet hath my word not removed mountains and what Ihave spoken hath not reached man. I went indeed unto men but not yethave I attained unto them.Then was there again spoken unto me without voice What knowest thouTHEREOF The dew falleth on the grass when the night is most silent.And I answered They mocked me when I found and walked in mine ownpath and certainly did my feet then tremble.And thus did they speak unto me Thou forgottest the path before nowdost thou also forget how to walkThen was there again spoken unto me without voice What matter abouttheir mockery Thou art one who hast unlearned to obey now shalt thoucommandKnowest thou not who is most needed by all He who commandeth greatthings.To execute great things is difficult but the more difficult task is tocommand great things.This is thy most unpardonable obstinacy thou hast the power and thouwilt not rule.And I answered I lack the lions voice for all commanding.Then was there again spoken unto me as a whispering It is the stillestwords which bring the storm. Thoughts that come with doves footstepsguide the world.O Zarathustra thou shalt go as a shadow of that which is to come thuswilt thou command and in commanding go foremost.And I answered I am ashamed.Then was there again spoken unto me without voice Thou must yet becomea child and be without shame.The pride of youth is still upon thee late hast thou become young buthe who would become a child must surmount even his youth.And I considered a long while and trembled. At last however did I saywhat I had said at first. I will not.Then did a laughing take place all around me. Alas how that laughinglacerated my bowels and cut into my heartAnd there was spoken unto me for the last time O Zarathustra thyfruits are ripe but thou art not ripe for thy fruitsSo must thou go again into solitude for thou shalt yet becomemellow.And again was there a laughing and it fled then did it become stillaround me as with a double stillness. I lay however on the groundand the sweat flowed from my limbs.Now have ye heard all and why I have to return into my solitude.Nothing have I kept hidden from you my friends.But even this have ye heard from me WHO is still the most reserved ofmenand will be soAh my friends I should have something more to say unto you I shouldhave something more to give unto you Why do I not give it Am I then aniggardWhen however Zarathustra had spoken these words the violence of hispain and a sense of the nearness of his departure from his friends cameover him so that he wept aloud and no one knew how to console him. Inthe night however he went away alone and left his friends.THIRD PART.Ye look aloft when ye long for exaltation and I look downward becauseI am exalted.Who among you can at the same time laugh and be exaltedHe who climbeth on the highest mountains laugheth at all tragic playsand tragic realities.ZARATHUSTRA I. Reading and Writing.XLV. THE WANDERER.Then when it was about midnight Zarathustra went his way over theridge of the isle that he might arrive early in the morning at theother coast because there he meant to embark. For there was a goodroadstead there in which foreign ships also liked to anchor thoseships took many people with them who wished to cross over from theHappy Isles. So when Zarathustra thus ascended the mountain he thoughton the way of his many solitary wanderings from youth onwards and howmany mountains and ridges and summits he had already climbed.I am a wanderer and mountainclimber said he to his heart I love notthe plains and it seemeth I cannot long sit still.And whatever may still overtake me as fate and experiencea wanderingwill be therein and a mountainclimbing in the end one experiencethonly oneself.The time is now past when accidents could befall me and what COULD nowfall to my lot which would not already be mine ownIt returneth only it cometh home to me at lastmine own Self andsuch of it as hath been long abroad and scattered among things andaccidents.And one thing more do I know I stand now before my last summit andbefore that which hath been longest reserved for me. Ah my hardest pathmust I ascend Ah I have begun my lonesomest wanderingHe however who is of my nature doth not avoid such an hour the hourthat saith unto him Now only dost thou go the way to thy greatnessSummit and abyssthese are now comprised togetherThou goest the way to thy greatness now hath it become thy last refugewhat was hitherto thy last dangerThou goest the way to thy greatness it must now be thy best couragethat there is no longer any path behind theeThou goest the way to thy greatness here shall no one steal after theeThy foot itself hath effaced the path behind thee and over it standethwritten Impossibility.And if all ladders henceforth fail thee then must thou learn to mountupon thine own head how couldst thou mount upward otherwiseUpon thine own head and beyond thine own heart Now must the gentlestin thee become the hardest.He who hath always muchindulged himself sickeneth at last by hismuchindulgence. Praises on what maketh hardy I do not praise the landwhere butter and honeyflowTo learn TO LOOK AWAY FROM oneself is necessary in order to see MANYTHINGSthis hardiness is needed by every mountainclimber.He however who is obtrusive with his eyes as a discerner how can heever see more of anything than its foregroundBut thou O Zarathustra wouldst view the ground of everything and itsbackground thus must thou mount even above thyselfup upwards untilthou hast even thy stars UNDER theeYea To look down upon myself and even upon my stars that only would Icall my SUMMIT that hath remained for me as my LAST summitThus spake Zarathustra to himself while ascending comforting his heartwith harsh maxims for he was sore at heart as he had never been before.And when he had reached the top of the mountainridge behold therelay the other sea spread out before him and he stood still and waslong silent. The night however was cold at this height and clear andstarry.I recognise my destiny said he at last sadly. Well I am ready. Nowhath my last lonesomeness begun.Ah this sombre sad sea below me Ah this sombre nocturnal vexationAh fate and sea To you must I now GO DOWNBefore my highest mountain do I stand and before my longest wanderingtherefore must I first go deeper down than I ever ascendedDeeper down into pain than I ever ascended even into its darkestflood So willeth my fate. Well I am ready.Whence come the highest mountains so did I once ask. Then did I learnthat they come out of the sea.That testimony is inscribed on their stones and on the walls of theirsummits. Out of the deepest must the highest come to its height.Thus spake Zarathustra on the ridge of the mountain where it was coldwhen however he came into the vicinity of the sea and at last stoodalone amongst the cliffs then had he become weary on his way andeagerer than ever before.Everything as yet sleepeth said he even the sea sleepeth. Drowsily andstrangely doth its eye gaze upon me.But it breatheth warmlyI feel it. And I feel also that it dreameth. Ittosseth about dreamily on hard pillows.Hark Hark How it groaneth with evil recollections Or evilexpectationsAh I am sad along with thee thou dusky monster and angry with myselfeven for thy sake.Ah that my hand hath not strength enough Gladly indeed would I freethee from evil dreamsAnd while Zarathustra thus spake he laughed at himself with melancholyand bitterness. What Zarathustra said he wilt thou even singconsolation to the seaAh thou amiable fool Zarathustra thou tooblindly confiding one Butthus hast thou ever been ever hast thou approached confidently all thatis terrible.Every monster wouldst thou caress. A whiff of warm breath a little softtuft on its paw and immediately wert thou ready to love and lure it.LOVE is the danger of the lonesomest one love to anything IF IT ONLYLIVE Laughable verily is my folly and my modesty in loveThus spake Zarathustra and laughed thereby a second time. Thenhowever he thought of his abandoned friendsand as if he had done thema wrong with his thoughts he upbraided himself because of his thoughts.And forthwith it came to pass that the laugher weptwith anger andlonging wept Zarathustra bitterly.XLVI. THE VISION AND THE ENIGMA..When it got abroad among the sailors that Zarathustra was on board theshipfor a man who came from the Happy Isles had gone on board alongwith himthere was great curiosity and expectation. But Zarathustrakept silent for two days and was cold and deaf with sadness so that heneither answered looks nor questions. On the evening of the second dayhowever he again opened his ears though he still kept silent forthere were many curious and dangerous things to be heard on board theship which came from afar and was to go still further. Zarathustrahowever was fond of all those who make distant voyages and dislike tolive without danger. And behold when listening his own tongue wasat last loosened and the ice of his heart broke. Then did he begin tospeak thusTo you the daring venturers and adventurers and whoever hath embarkedwith cunning sails upon frightful seasTo you the enigmaintoxicated the twilightenjoyers whose souls areallured by flutes to every treacherous gulfFor ye dislike to grope at a thread with cowardly hand and where yecan DIVINE there do ye hate to CALCULATETo you only do I tell the enigma that I SAWthe vision of thelonesomest one.Gloomily walked I lately in corpsecoloured twilightgloomily andsternly with compressed lips. Not only one sun had set for me.A path which ascended daringly among boulders an evil lonesome pathwhich neither herb nor shrub any longer cheered a mountainpathcrunched under the daring of my foot.Mutely marching over the scornful clinking of pebbles trampling thestone that let it slip thus did my foot force its way upwards.Upwardsin spite of the spirit that drew it downwards towards theabyss the spirit of gravity my devil and archenemy.Upwardsalthough it sat upon me halfdwarf halfmole paralysedparalysing dripping lead in mine ear and thoughts like drops of leadinto my brain.O Zarathustra it whispered scornfully syllable by syllable thoustone of wisdom Thou threwest thyself high but every thrown stonemustfallO Zarathustra thou stone of wisdom thou slingstone thoustardestroyer Thyself threwest thou so highbut every thrownstonemust fallCondemned of thyself and to thine own stoning O Zarathustra farindeed threwest thou thy stonebut upon THYSELF will it recoilThen was the dwarf silent and it lasted long. The silence howeveroppressed me and to be thus in pairs one is verily lonesomer than whenaloneI ascended I ascended I dreamt I thoughtbut everything oppressedme. A sick one did I resemble whom bad torture wearieth and a worsedream reawakeneth out of his first sleep.But there is something in me which I call courage it hath hithertoslain for me every dejection. This courage at last bade me stand stilland say Dwarf Thou Or IFor courage is the best slayercourage which ATTACKETH for in everyattack there is sound of triumph.Man however is the most courageous animal thereby hath he overcomeevery animal. With sound of triumph hath he overcome every pain humanpain however is the sorest pain.Courage slayeth also giddiness at abysses and where doth man not standat abysses Is not seeing itselfseeing abyssesCourage is the best slayer courage slayeth also fellowsuffering.Fellowsuffering however is the deepest abyss as deeply as manlooketh into life so deeply also doth he look into suffering.Courage however is the best slayer courage which attacketh itslayeth even death itself for it saith WAS THAT life Well OncemoreIn such speech however there is much sound of triumph. He who hathears to hear let him hear..Halt dwarf said I. Either Ior thou I however am the strongerof the twothou knowest not mine abysmal thought ITcouldst thou notendureThen happened that which made me lighter for the dwarf sprang from myshoulder the prying sprite And it squatted on a stone in front of me.There was however a gateway just where we halted.Look at this gateway Dwarf I continued it hath two faces. Tworoads come together here these hath no one yet gone to the end of.This long lane backwards it continueth for an eternity. And that longlane forwardthat is another eternity.They are antithetical to one another these roads they directly abut onone anotherand it is here at this gateway that they come together.The name of the gateway is inscribed above This Moment.But should one follow them furtherand ever further and furtheron thinkest thou dwarf that these roads would be eternallyantitheticalEverything straight lieth murmured the dwarf contemptuously. Alltruth is crooked time itself is a circle.Thou spirit of gravity said I wrathfully do not take it toolightly Or I shall let thee squat where thou squattest HaltfootandI carried thee HIGHObserve continued I This Moment From the gateway This Momentthere runneth a long eternal lane BACKWARDS behind us lieth aneternity.Must not whatever CAN run its course of all things have already runalong that lane Must not whatever CAN happen of all things have alreadyhappened resulted and gone byAnd if everything have already existed what thinkest thou dwarf ofThis Moment Must not this gateway alsohave already existedAnd are not all things closely bound together in such wise that ThisMoment draweth all coming things after it CONSEQUENTLYitself alsoFor whatever CAN run its course of all things also in this long laneOUTWARDMUST it once more runAnd this slow spider which creepeth in the moonlight and this moonlightitself and thou and I in this gateway whispering together whisperingof eternal thingsmust we not all have already existedAnd must we not return and run in that other lane out before us thatlong weird lanemust we not eternally returnThus did I speak and always more softly for I was afraid of mine ownthoughts and arrearthoughts. Then suddenly did I hear a dog HOWL nearme.Had I ever heard a dog howl thus My thoughts ran back. Yes When I wasa child in my most distant childhoodThen did I hear a dog howl thus. And saw it also with hair bristlingits head upwards trembling in the stillest midnight when even dogsbelieve in ghostsSo that it excited my commiseration. For just then went the full moonsilent as death over the house just then did it stand still a glowingglobeat rest on the flat roof as if on some ones propertyThereby had the dog been terrified for dogs believe in thieves andghosts. And when I again heard such howling then did it excite mycommiseration once more.Where was now the dwarf And the gateway And the spider And all thewhispering Had I dreamt Had I awakened Twixt rugged rocks did Isuddenly stand alone dreary in the dreariest moonlight.BUT THERE LAY A MAN And there The dog leaping bristling whiningnowdid it see me comingthen did it howl again then did it CRYhad Iever heard a dog cry so for helpAnd verily what I saw the like had I never seen. A young shepherd didI see writhing choking quivering with distorted countenance andwith a heavy black serpent hanging out of his mouth.Had I ever seen so much loathing and pale horror on one countenanceHe had perhaps gone to sleep Then had the serpent crawled into histhroatthere had it bitten itself fast.My hand pulled at the serpent and pulledin vain I failed to pullthe serpent out of his throat. Then there cried out of me Bite BiteIts head off Biteso cried it out of me my horror my hatred myloathing my pity all my good and my bad cried with one voice out ofme.Ye daring ones around me Ye venturers and adventurers and whoeverof you have embarked with cunning sails on unexplored seas YeenigmaenjoyersSolve unto me the enigma that I then beheld interpret unto me thevision of the lonesomest oneFor it was a vision and a foresightWHAT did I then behold in parableAnd WHO is it that must come some dayWHO is the shepherd into whose throat the serpent thus crawled WHO isthe man into whose throat all the heaviest and blackest will thus crawlThe shepherd however bit as my cry had admonished him he bit with astrong bite Far away did he spit the head of the serpent and sprangup.No longer shepherd no longer mana transfigured being alightsurrounded being that LAUGHED Never on earth laughed a man as HElaughedO my brethren I heard a laughter which was no human laughterand nowgnaweth a thirst at me a longing that is never allayed.My longing for that laughter gnaweth at me oh how can I still endureto live And how could I endure to die at presentThus spake Zarathustra.XLVII. INVOLUNTARY BLISS.With such enigmas and bitterness in his heart did Zarathustra sail oerthe sea. When however he was four dayjourneys from the HappyIsles and from his friends then had he surmounted all his paintriumphantly and with firm foot did he again accept his fate. And thentalked Zarathustra in this wise to his exulting conscienceAlone am I again and like to be so alone with the pure heaven and theopen sea and again is the afternoon around me.On an afternoon did I find my friends for the first time on anafternoon also did I find them a second timeat the hour when alllight becometh stiller.For whatever happiness is still on its way twixt heaven and earth nowseeketh for lodging a luminous soul WITH HAPPINESS hath all light nowbecome stiller.O afternoon of my life Once did my happiness also descend to the valleythat it might seek a lodging then did it find those open hospitablesouls.O afternoon of my life What did I not surrender that I might haveone thing this living plantation of my thoughts and this dawn of myhighest hopeCompanions did the creating one once seek and children of HIS hope andlo it turned out that he could not find them except he himself shouldfirst create them.Thus am I in the midst of my work to my children going and fromthem returning for the sake of his children must Zarathustra perfecthimself.For in ones heart one loveth only ones child and ones work and wherethere is great love to oneself then is it the sign of pregnancy sohave I found it.Still are my children verdant in their first spring standing nigh oneanother and shaken in common by the winds the trees of my garden andof my best soil.And verily where such trees stand beside one another there ARE HappyIslesBut one day will I take them up and put each by itself alone that itmay learn lonesomeness and defiance and prudence.Gnarled and crooked and with flexible hardness shall it then stand bythe sea a living lighthouse of unconquerable life.Yonder where the storms rush down into the sea and the snout of themountain drinketh water shall each on a time have his day and nightwatches for HIS testing and recognition.Recognised and tested shall each be to see if he be of my type andlineageif he be master of a long will silent even when he speakethand giving in such wise that he TAKETH in givingSo that he may one day become my companion a fellowcreator andfellowenjoyer with Zarathustrasuch a one as writeth my will on mytables for the fuller perfection of all things.And for his sake and for those like him must I perfect MYSELFtherefore do I now avoid my happiness and present myself to everymisfortunefor MY final testing and recognition.And verily it were time that I went away and the wanderers shadow andthe longest tedium and the stillest hourhave all said unto me It isthe highest timeThe word blew to me through the keyhole and said Come The door sprangsubtlely open unto me and said GoBut I lay enchained to my love for my children desire spread thissnare for methe desire for lovethat I should become the prey of mychildren and lose myself in them.Desiringthat is now for me to have lost myself. I POSSESS YOU MYCHILDREN In this possessing shall everything be assurance and nothingdesire.But brooding lay the sun of my love upon me in his own juice stewedZarathustrathen did shadows and doubts fly past me.For frost and winter I now longed Oh that frost and winter wouldagain make me crack and crunch sighed Ithen arose icy mist out ofme.My past burst its tomb many pains buried alive woke up fully slepthad they merely concealed in corpseclothes.So called everything unto me in signs It is time But Iheard notuntil at last mine abyss moved and my thought bit me.Ah abysmal thought which art MY thought When shall I find strength tohear thee burrowing and no longer trembleTo my very throat throbbeth my heart when I hear thee burrowing Thymuteness even is like to strangle me thou abysmal mute oneAs yet have I never ventured to call thee UP it hath been enough thatIhave carried thee about with me As yet have I not been strongenough for my final lionwantonness and playfulness.Sufficiently formidable unto me hath thy weight ever been but one dayshall I yet find the strength and the lions voice which will call theeupWhen I shall have surmounted myself therein then will I surmount myselfalso in that which is greater and a VICTORY shall be the seal of myperfectionMeanwhile do I sail along on uncertain seas chance flattereth mesmoothtongued chance forward and backward do I gaze still see I noend.As yet hath the hour of my final struggle not come to meor doth itcome to me perhaps just now Verily with insidious beauty do sea andlife gaze upon me round aboutO afternoon of my life O happiness before eventide O haven upon highseas O peace in uncertainty How I distrust all of youVerily distrustful am I of your insidious beauty Like the lover am Iwho distrusteth too sleek smiling.As he pusheth the bestbeloved before himtender even in severity thejealous one so do I push this blissful hour before me.Away with thee thou blissful hour With thee hath there come to me aninvoluntary bliss Ready for my severest pain do I here standat thewrong time hast thou comeAway with thee thou blissful hour Rather harbour therewith mychildren Hasten and bless them before eventide with MY happinessThere already approacheth eventide the sun sinketh. AwaymyhappinessThus spake Zarathustra. And he waited for his misfortune the wholenight but he waited in vain. The night remained clear and calm andhappiness itself came nigher and nigher unto him. Towards morninghowever Zarathustra laughed to his heart and said mockinglyHappiness runneth after me. That is because I do not run after women.Happiness however is a woman.XLVIII. BEFORE SUNRISE.O heaven above me thou pure thou deep heaven Thou abyss of lightGazing on thee I tremble with divine desires.Up to thy height to toss myselfthat is MY depth In thy purity to hidemyselfthat is MINE innocenceThe God veileth his beauty thus hidest thou thy stars. Thou speakestnot THUS proclaimest thou thy wisdom unto me.Mute oer the raging sea hast thou risen for me today thy love and thymodesty make a revelation unto my raging soul.In that thou camest unto me beautiful veiled in thy beauty in thatthou spakest unto me mutely obvious in thy wisdomOh how could I fail to divine all the modesty of thy soul BEFORE thesun didst thou come unto methe lonesomest one.We have been friends from the beginning to us are grief gruesomenessand ground common even the sun is common to us.We do not speak to each other because we know too much we keepsilent to each other we smile our knowledge to each other.Art thou not the light of my fire Hast thou not the sistersoul of mineinsightTogether did we learn everything together did we learn to ascend beyondourselves to ourselves and to smile uncloudedlyUncloudedly to smile down out of luminous eyes and out of miles ofdistance when under us constraint and purpose and guilt steam likerain.And wandered I alone for WHAT did my soul hunger by night and inlabyrinthine paths And climbed I mountains WHOM did I ever seek ifnot thee upon mountainsAnd all my wandering and mountainclimbing a necessity was it merelyand a makeshift of the unhandy oneto FLY only wanteth mine entirewill to fly into THEEAnd what have I hated more than passing clouds and whatever tainteththee And mine own hatred have I even hated because it tainted theeThe passing clouds I detestthose stealthy cats of prey they takefrom thee and me what is common to usthe vast unbounded Yea andAmensaying.These mediators and mixers we detestthe passing clouds thosehalfandhalf ones that have neither learned to bless nor to curse fromthe heart.Rather will I sit in a tub under a closed heaven rather will I sit inthe abyss without heaven than see thee thou luminous heaven taintedwith passing cloudsAnd oft have I longed to pin them fast with the jagged goldwires oflightning that I might like the thunder beat the drum upon theirkettlebelliesAn angry drummer because they rob me of thy Yea and Amenthouheaven above me thou pure thou luminous heaven Thou abyss oflightbecause they rob thee of MY Yea and Amen.For rather will I have noise and thunders and tempestblasts than thisdiscreet doubting catrepose and also amongst men do I hate mostof all the softtreaders and halfandhalf ones and the doubtinghesitating passing clouds.And he who cannot bless shall LEARN to cursethis clear teachingdropt unto me from the clear heaven this star standeth in my heaveneven in dark nights.I however am a blesser and a Yeasayer if thou be but around me thoupure thou luminous heaven Thou abyss of lightinto all abysses do Ithen carry my beneficent Yeasaying.A blesser have I become and a Yeasayer and therefore strove I long andwas a striver that I might one day get my hands free for blessing.This however is my blessing to stand above everything as its ownheaven its round roof its azure bell and eternal security and blessedis he who thus blessethFor all things are baptized at the font of eternity and beyond good andevil good and evil themselves however are but fugitive shadows anddamp afflictions and passing clouds.Verily it is a blessing and not a blasphemy when I teach that aboveall things there standeth the heaven of chance the heaven of innocencethe heaven of hazard the heaven of wantonness.Of Hazardthat is the oldest nobility in the world that gave I backto all things I emancipated them from bondage under purpose.This freedom and celestial serenity did I put like an azure bell aboveall things when I taught that over them and through them no eternalWillwilleth.This wantonness and folly did I put in place of that Will when I taughtthat In everything there is one thing impossiblerationalityA LITTLE reason to be sure a germ of wisdom scattered from star tostarthis leaven is mixed in all things for the sake of folly wisdomis mixed in all thingsA little wisdom is indeed possible but this blessed security have Ifound in all things that they preferto dance on the feet of chance.O heaven above me thou pure thou lofty heaven This is now thy purityunto me that there is no eternal reasonspider and reasoncobwebThat thou art to me a dancingfloor for divine chances that thou artto me a table of the Gods for divine dice and diceplayersBut thou blushest Have I spoken unspeakable things Have I abused whenI meant to bless theeOr is it the shame of being two of us that maketh thee blushDost thoubid me go and be silent because nowDAY comethThe world is deepand deeper than eer the day could read. Noteverything may be uttered in presence of day. But day cometh so let uspartO heaven above me thou modest one thou glowing one O thou myhappiness before sunrise The day cometh so let us partThus spake Zarathustra.XLIX. THE BEDWARFING VIRTUE..When Zarathustra was again on the continent he did not go straightwayto his mountains and his cave but made many wanderings andquestionings and ascertained this and that so that he said of himselfjestingly Lo a river that floweth back unto its source in manywindings For he wanted to learn what had taken place AMONG MEN duringthe interval whether they had become greater or smaller. And once whenhe saw a row of new houses he marvelled and saidWhat do these houses mean Verily no great soul put them up as itssimileDid perhaps a silly child take them out of its toybox Would thatanother child put them again into the boxAnd these rooms and chamberscan MEN go out and in there They seem tobe made for silk dolls or for daintyeaters who perhaps let others eatwith them.And Zarathustra stood still and meditated. At last he said sorrowfullyThere hath EVERYTHING become smallerEverywhere do I see lower doorways he who is of MY type can still gotherethrough buthe must stoopOh when shall I arrive again at my home where I shall no longer haveto stoopshall no longer have to stoop BEFORE THE SMALL ONESAndZarathustra sighed and gazed into the distance.The same day however he gave his discourse on the bedwarfing virtue..I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open they do not forgiveme for not envying their virtues.They bite at me because I say unto them that for small people smallvirtues are necessaryand because it is hard for me to understand thatsmall people are NECESSARYHere am I still like a cock in a strange farmyard at which even thehens peck but on that account I am not unfriendly to the hens.I am courteous towards them as towards all small annoyances to beprickly towards what is small seemeth to me wisdom for hedgehogs.They all speak of me when they sit around their fire in theeveningthey speak of me but no one thinkethof meThis is the new stillness which I have experienced their noise aroundme spreadeth a mantle over my thoughts.They shout to one another What is this gloomy cloud about to do to usLet us see that it doth not bring a plague upon usAnd recently did a woman seize upon her child that was coming untome Take the children away cried she such eyes scorch childrenssouls.They cough when I speak they think coughing an objection to strongwindsthey divine nothing of the boisterousness of my happinessWe have not yet time for Zarathustraso they object but what matterabout a time that hath no time for ZarathustraAnd if they should altogether praise me how could I go to sleep onTHEIR praise A girdle of spines is their praise unto me it scratchethme even when I take it off.And this also did I learn among them the praiser doeth as if he gaveback in truth however he wanteth more to be given himAsk my foot if their lauding and luring strains please it Verilyto such measure and ticktack it liketh neither to dance nor to standstill.To small virtues would they fain lure and laud me to the ticktack ofsmall happiness would they fain persuade my foot.I pass through this people and keep mine eyes open they have becomeSMALLER and ever become smallerTHE REASON THEREOF IS THEIR DOCTRINEOF HAPPINESS AND VIRTUE.For they are moderate also in virtuebecause they want comfort. Withcomfort however moderate virtue only is compatible.To be sure they also learn in their way to stride on and strideforward that I call their HOBBLING.Thereby they become a hindranceto all who are in haste.And many of them go forward and look backwards thereby with stiffenednecks those do I like to run up against.Foot and eye shall not lie nor give the lie to each other. But there ismuch lying among small people.Some of them WILL but most of them are WILLED. Some of them aregenuine but most of them are bad actors.There are actors without knowing it amongst them and actors withoutintending it the genuine ones are always rare especially the genuineactors.Of man there is little here therefore do their women masculinisethemselves. For only he who is man enough willSAVE THE WOMAN inwoman.And this hypocrisy found I worst amongst them that even those whocommand feign the virtues of those who serve.I serve thou servest we serveso chanteth here even the hypocrisyof the rulersand alas if the first lord be ONLY the first servantAh even upon their hypocrisy did mine eyes curiosity alight and welldid I divine all their flyhappiness and their buzzing around sunnywindowpanes.So much kindness so much weakness do I see. So much justice and pityso much weakness.Round fair and considerate are they to one another as grains of sandare round fair and considerate to grains of sand.Modestly to embrace a small happinessthat do they call submissionand at the same time they peer modestly after a new small happiness.In their hearts they want simply one thing most of all that no one hurtthem. Thus do they anticipate every ones wishes and do well unto everyone.That however is COWARDICE though it be called virtue.And when they chance to speak harshly those small people then do Ihear therein only their hoarsenessevery draught of air maketh themhoarse.Shrewd indeed are they their virtues have shrewd fingers. But they lackfists their fingers do not know how to creep behind fists.Virtue for them is what maketh modest and tame therewith have they madethe wolf a dog and man himself mans best domestic animal.We set our chair in the MIDSTso saith their smirking unto meandas far from dying gladiators as from satisfied swine.That however isMEDIOCRITY though it be called moderation..I pass through this people and let fall many words but they knowneither how to take nor how to retain them.They wonder why I came not to revile venery and vice and verily I camenot to warn against pickpockets eitherThey wonder why I am not ready to abet and whet their wisdom as if theyhad not yet enough of wiseacres whose voices grate on mine ear likeslatepencilsAnd when I call out Curse all the cowardly devils in you thatwould fain whimper and fold the hands and adorethen do they shoutZarathustra is godless.And especially do their teachers of submission shout thisbutprecisely in their ears do I love to cry Yea I AM Zarathustra thegodlessThose teachers of submission Wherever there is aught puny or sicklyor scabby there do they creep like lice and only my disgust preventethme from cracking them.Well This is my sermon for THEIR ears I am Zarathustra the godlesswho saith Who is more godless than I that I may enjoy his teachingI am Zarathustra the godless where do I find mine equal And allthose are mine equals who give unto themselves their Will and divestthemselves of all submission.I am Zarathustra the godless I cook every chance in MY pot. And onlywhen it hath been quite cooked do I welcome it as MY food.And verily many a chance came imperiously unto me but still moreimperiously did my WILL speak unto itthen did it lie imploringly uponits kneesImploring that it might find home and heart with me and sayingflatteringly See O Zarathustra how friend only cometh untofriendBut why talk I when no one hath MINE ears And so will I shout it outunto all the windsYe ever become smaller ye small people Ye crumble away ye comfortableones Ye will yet perishBy your many small virtues by your many small omissions and by yourmany small submissionsToo tender too yielding so is your soil But for a tree to becomeGREAT it seeketh to twine hard roots around hard rocksAlso what ye omit weaveth at the web of all the human future even yournaught is a cobweb and a spider that liveth on the blood of the future.And when ye take then is it like stealing ye small virtuous onesbut even among knaves HONOUR saith that one shall only steal when onecannot rob.It giveth itselfthat is also a doctrine of submission. But I sayunto you ye comfortable ones that IT TAKETH TO ITSELF and will evertake more and more from youAh that ye would renounce all HALFwilling and would decide foridleness as ye decide for actionAh that ye understood my word Do ever what ye willbut first be suchas CAN WILL.Love ever your neighbour as yourselvesbut first be such as LOVETHEMSELVESSuch as love with great love such as love with great contempt Thusspeaketh Zarathustra the godless.But why talk I when no one hath MINE ears It is still an hour tooearly for me here.Mine own forerunner am I among this people mine own cockcrow in darklanes.But THEIR hour cometh And there cometh also mine Hourly do they becomesmaller poorer unfruitfullerpoor herbs poor earthAnd SOON shall they stand before me like dry grass and prairie andverily weary of themselvesand panting for FIRE more than for waterO blessed hour of the lightning O mystery before noontideRunningfires will I one day make of them and heralds with flaming tonguesHerald shall they one day with flaming tongues It cometh it is nighTHE GREAT NOONTIDEThus spake Zarathustra.L. ON THE OLIVEMOUNT.Winter a bad guest sitteth with me at home blue are my hands with hisfriendly handshaking.I honour him that bad guest but gladly leave him alone. Gladly do Irun away from him and when one runneth WELL then one escapeth himWith warm feet and warm thoughts do I run where the wind is calmto thesunny corner of mine olivemount.There do I laugh at my stern guest and am still fond of him because hecleareth my house of flies and quieteth many little noises.For he suffereth it not if a gnat wanteth to buzz or even two of themalso the lanes maketh he lonesome so that the moonlight is afraid thereat night.A hard guest is hebut I honour him and do not worship like thetenderlings the potbellied fireidol.Better even a little teethchattering than idoladorationso willethmy nature. And especially have I a grudge against all ardent steamingsteamy fireidols.Him whom I love I love better in winter than in summer better do Inow mock at mine enemies and more heartily when winter sitteth in myhouse.Heartily verily even when I CREEP into bed there still laughethand wantoneth my hidden happiness even my deceptive dream laugheth.I acreeper Never in my life did I creep before the powerful and ifever I lied then did I lie out of love. Therefore am I glad even in mywinterbed.A poor bed warmeth me more than a rich one for I am jealous of mypoverty. And in winter she is most faithful unto me.With a wickedness do I begin every day I mock at the winter with a coldbath on that account grumbleth my stern housemate.Also do I like to tickle him with a waxtaper that he may finally letthe heavens emerge from ashygrey twilight.For especially wicked am I in the morning at the early hour when thepail rattleth at the well and horses neigh warmly in grey lanesImpatiently do I then wait that the clear sky may finally dawn for methe snowbearded wintersky the hoary one the whiteheadThe wintersky the silent wintersky which often stifleth even itssunDid I perhaps learn from it the long clear silence Or did it learn itfrom me Or hath each of us devised it himselfOf all good things the origin is a thousandfoldall good roguishthings spring into existence for joy how could they always do soforonce onlyA good roguish thing is also the long silence and to look like thewintersky out of a clear roundeyed countenanceLike it to stifle ones sun and ones inflexible solar will verilythis art and this winterroguishness have I learnt WELLMy bestloved wickedness and art is it that my silence hath learned notto betray itself by silence.Clattering with diction and dice I outwit the solemn assistants allthose stern watchers shall my will and purpose elude.That no one might see down into my depth and into mine ultimatewillfor that purpose did I devise the long clear silence.Many a shrewd one did I find he veiled his countenance and made hiswater muddy that no one might see therethrough and thereunder.But precisely unto him came the shrewder distrusters and nutcrackersprecisely from him did they fish his bestconcealed fishBut the clear the honest the transparentthese are for me the wisestsilent ones in them so PROFOUND is the depth that even the clearestwater doth notbetray it.Thou snowbearded silent wintersky thou roundeyed whitehead aboveme Oh thou heavenly simile of my soul and its wantonnessAnd MUST I not conceal myself like one who hath swallowed goldlest mysoul should be ripped upMUST I not wear stilts that they may OVERLOOK my long legsall thoseenviers and injurers around meThose dingy firewarmed usedup greentinted illnatured soulshowCOULD their envy endure my happinessThus do I show them only the ice and winter of my peaksand NOT that mymountain windeth all the solar girdles around itThey hear only the whistling of my winterstorms and know NOT that Ialso travel over warm seas like longing heavy hot southwinds.They commiserate also my accidents and chancesbut MY word saithSuffer the chance to come unto me innocent is it as a little childHow COULD they endure my happiness if I did not put around itaccidents and winterprivations and bearskin caps and enmantlingsnowflakesIf I did not myself commiserate their PITY the pity of those enviersand injurersIf I did not myself sigh before them and chatter with cold andpatiently LET myself be swathed in their pityThis is the wise waggishwill and goodwill of my soul that itCONCEALETH NOT its winters and glacial storms it concealeth not itschilblains either.To one man lonesomeness is the flight of the sick one to another itis the flight FROM the sick ones.Let them HEAR me chattering and sighing with wintercold all those poorsquinting knaves around me With such sighing and chattering do I fleefrom their heated rooms.Let them sympathise with me and sigh with me on account of mychilblains At the ice of knowledge will he yet FREEZE TO DEATHsothey mourn.Meanwhile do I run with warm feet hither and thither on mineolivemount in the sunny corner of mine olivemount do I sing and mockat all pity.Thus sang Zarathustra.LI. ON PASSINGBY.Thus slowly wandering through many peoples and divers cities didZarathustra return by roundabout roads to his mountains and his cave.And behold thereby came he unawares also to the gate of the GREAT CITY.Here however a foaming fool with extended hands sprang forward tohim and stood in his way. It was the same fool whom the people calledthe ape of Zarathustra for he had learned from him something of theexpression and modulation of language and perhaps liked also to borrowfrom the store of his wisdom. And the fool talked thus to ZarathustraO Zarathustra here is the great city here hast thou nothing to seekand everything to lose.Why wouldst thou wade through this mire Have pity upon thy foot Spitrather on the gate of the city andturn backHere is the hell for anchorites thoughts here are great thoughtsseethed alive and boiled small.Here do all great sentiments decay here may only rattlebonedsensations rattleSmellest thou not already the shambles and cookshops of the spiritSteameth not this city with the fumes of slaughtered spiritSeest thou not the souls hanging like limp dirty ragsAnd they makenewspapers also out of these ragsHearest thou not how spirit hath here become a verbal game Loathsomeverbal swill doth it vomit forthAnd they make newspapers also out ofthis verbal swill.They hound one another and know not whither They inflame one anotherand know not why They tinkle with their pinchbeck they jingle withtheir gold.They are cold and seek warmth from distilled waters they are inflamedand seek coolness from frozen spirits they are all sick and sorethrough public opinion.All lusts and vices are here at home but here there are also thevirtuous there is much appointable appointed virtueMuch appointable virtue with scribefingers and hardy sittingflesh andwaitingflesh blessed with small breaststars and padded haunchlessdaughters.There is here also much piety and much faithful spittlelicking andspittlebacking before the God of Hosts.From on high drippeth the star and the gracious spittle for thehigh longeth every starless bosom.The moon hath its court and the court hath its mooncalves unto allhowever that cometh from the court do the mendicant people pray andall appointable mendicant virtues.I serve thou servest we serveso prayeth all appointable virtueto the prince that the merited star may at last stick on the slenderbreastBut the moon still revolveth around all that is earthly so revolvethalso the prince around what is earthliest of allthat however is thegold of the shopman.The God of the Hosts of war is not the God of the golden bar the princeproposeth but the shopmandisposethBy all that is luminous and strong and good in thee O Zarathustra Spiton this city of shopmen and return backHere floweth all blood putridly and tepidly and frothily through allveins spit on the great city which is the great slum where all thescum frotheth togetherSpit on the city of compressed souls and slender breasts of pointedeyes and sticky fingersOn the city of the obtrusive the brazenfaced the pendemagogues andtonguedemagogues the overheated ambitiousWhere everything maimed illfamed lustful untrustful overmellowsicklyyellow and seditious festereth perniciousSpit on the great city and turn backHere however did Zarathustra interrupt the foaming fool and shut hismouth.Stop this at once called out Zarathustra long have thy speech and thyspecies disgusted meWhy didst thou live so long by the swamp that thou thyself hadst tobecome a frog and a toadFloweth there not a tainted frothy swampblood in thine own veinswhen thou hast thus learned to croak and revileWhy wentest thou not into the forest Or why didst thou not till theground Is the sea not full of green islandsI despise thy contempt and when thou warnedst mewhy didst thou notwarn thyselfOut of love alone shall my contempt and my warning bird take wing butnot out of the swampThey call thee mine ape thou foaming fool but I call thee mygruntingpigby thy grunting thou spoilest even my praise of folly.What was it that first made thee grunt Because no one sufficientlyFLATTERED theetherefore didst thou seat thyself beside this filththat thou mightest have cause for much gruntingThat thou mightest have cause for much VENGEANCE For vengeance thouvain fool is all thy foaming I have divined thee wellBut thy foolsword injureth ME even when thou art right And even ifZarathustras word WERE a hundred times justified thou wouldst everDOwrong with my wordThus spake Zarathustra. Then did he look on the great city and sighedand was long silent. At last he spake thusI loathe also this great city and not only this fool. Here and therethere is nothing to better nothing to worsen.Woe to this great cityAnd I would that I already saw the pillar offire in which it will be consumedFor such pillars of fire must precede the great noontide. But this hathits time and its own fate.This precept however give I unto thee in parting thou fool Whereone can no longer love there should onePASS BYThus spake Zarathustra and passed by the fool and the great city.LII. THE APOSTATES..Ah lieth everything already withered and grey which but lately stoodgreen and manyhued on this meadow And how much honey of hope did Icarry hence into my beehivesThose young hearts have already all become oldand not old even onlyweary ordinary comfortablethey declare it We have again becomepious.Of late did I see them run forth at early morn with valorous steps butthe feet of their knowledge became weary and now do they malign eventheir morning valourVerily many of them once lifted their legs like the dancer to themwinked the laughter of my wisdomthen did they bethink themselves.Just now have I seen them bent downto creep to the cross.Around light and liberty did they once flutter like gnats and youngpoets. A little older a little colder and already are they mystifiersand mumblers and mollycoddles.Did perhaps their hearts despond because lonesomeness had swallowed melike a whale Did their ear perhaps hearken yearninglylong for me INVAIN and for my trumpetnotes and heraldcallsAh Ever are there but few of those whose hearts have persistentcourage and exuberance and in such remaineth also the spirit patient.The rest however are COWARDLY.The rest these are always the great majority the commonplace thesuperfluous the far too manythose all are cowardlyHim who is of my type will also the experiences of my type meet on theway so that his first companions must be corpses and buffoons.His second companions howeverthey will call themselves hisBELIEVERSwill be a living host with much love much folly muchunbearded veneration.To those believers shall he who is of my type among men not bind hisheart in those springtimes and manyhued meadows shall he not believewho knoweth the fickly fainthearted human speciesCOULD they do otherwise then would they also WILL otherwise. Thehalfandhalf spoil every whole. That leaves become witheredwhat isthere to lament about thatLet them go and fall away O Zarathustra and do not lament Better evento blow amongst them with rustling windsBlow amongst those leaves O Zarathustra that everything WITHERED mayrun away from thee the faster.We have again become piousso do those apostates confess and some ofthem are still too pusillanimous thus to confess.Unto them I look into the eyebefore them I say it unto their face andunto the blush on their cheeks Ye are those who again PRAYIt is however a shame to pray Not for all but for thee and me andwhoever hath his conscience in his head. For THEE it is a shame to prayThou knowest it well the fainthearted devil in thee which wouldfain fold its arms and place its hands in its bosom and take iteasierthis fainthearted devil persuadeth thee that there IS a GodTHEREBY however dost thou belong to the lightdreading type to whomlight never permitteth repose now must thou daily thrust thy headdeeper into obscurity and vapourAnd verily thou choosest the hour well for just now do the nocturnalbirds again fly abroad. The hour hath come for all lightdreadingpeople the vesper hour and leisure hour when they do nottakeleisure.I hear it and smell it it hath cometheir hour for hunt andprocession not indeed for a wild hunt but for a tame lame snufflingsofttreaders softprayers huntFor a hunt after susceptible simpletons all mousetraps for the hearthave again been set And whenever I lift a curtain a nightmoth rushethout of it.Did it perhaps squat there along with another nightmoth For everywheredo I smell small concealed communities and wherever there are closetsthere are new devotees therein and the atmosphere of devotees.They sit for long evenings beside one another and say Let us againbecome like little children and say good Godruined in mouths andstomachs by the pious confectioners.Or they look for long evenings at a crafty lurking crossspider thatpreacheth prudence to the spiders themselves and teacheth that undercrosses it is good for cobwebspinningOr they sit all day at swamps with anglerods and on that account thinkthemselves PROFOUND but whoever fisheth where there are no fish I donot even call him superficialOr they learn in godlygay style to play the harp with a hymnpoetwho would fain harp himself into the heart of young girlsfor he hathtired of old girls and their praises.Or they learn to shudder with a learned semimadcap who waiteth indarkened rooms for spirits to come to himand the spirit runneth awayentirelyOr they listen to an old roving howl and growlpiper who hath learntfrom the sad winds the sadness of sounds now pipeth he as the wind andpreacheth sadness in sad strains.And some of them have even become nightwatchmen they know now how toblow horns and go about at night and awaken old things which have longfallen asleep.Five words about old things did I hear yesternight at the gardenwallthey came from such old sorrowful arid nightwatchmen.For a father he careth not sufficiently for his children human fathersdo this betterHe is too old He now careth no more for his childrenanswered theother nightwatchman.HATH he then children No one can prove it unless he himself prove itI have long wished that he would for once prove it thoroughly.Prove As if HE had ever proved anything Proving is difficult to himhe layeth great stress on ones BELIEVING him.Ay Ay Belief saveth him belief in him. That is the way with oldpeople So it is with us alsoThus spake to each other the two old nightwatchmen and lightscarersand tooted thereupon sorrowfully on their horns so did it happenyesternight at the gardenwall.To me however did the heart writhe with laughter and was like tobreak it knew not where to go and sunk into the midriff.Verily it will be my death yetto choke with laughter when I see assesdrunken and hear nightwatchmen thus doubt about God.Hath the time not LONG since passed for all such doubts Who maynowadays awaken such old slumbering lightshunning thingsWith the old Deities hath it long since come to an endand verily agood joyful Deityend had theyThey did not begloom themselves to deaththat do people fabricate Onthe contrary theyLAUGHED themselves to death once on a timeThat took place when the unGodliest utterance came from a Godhimselfthe utterance There is but one God Thou shalt have no otherGods before meAn old grimbeard of a God a jealous one forgot himself in suchwiseAnd all the Gods then laughed and shook upon their thrones andexclaimed Is it not just divinity that there are Gods but no GodHe that hath an ear let him hear.Thus talked Zarathustra in the city he loved which is surnamed ThePied Cow. For from here he had but two days to travel to reach oncemore his cave and his animals his soul however rejoiced unceasinglyon account of the nighness of his return home.LIII. THE RETURN HOME.O lonesomeness My HOME lonesomeness Too long have I lived wildly inwild remoteness to return to thee without tearsNow threaten me with the finger as mothers threaten now smile upon meas mothers smile now say just Who was it that like a whirlwind oncerushed away from meWho when departing called out Too long have I sat with lonesomenessthere have I unlearned silence THAT hast thou learned nowsurelyO Zarathustra everything do I know and that thou wert MORE FORSAKENamongst the many thou unique one than thou ever wert with meOne thing is forsakenness another matter is lonesomeness THAT hastthou now learned And that amongst men thou wilt ever be wild andstrangeWild and strange even when they love thee for above all they want tobe TREATED INDULGENTLYHere however art thou at home and house with thyself here canst thouutter everything and unbosom all motives nothing is here ashamed ofconcealed congealed feelings.Here do all things come caressingly to thy talk and flatter thee forthey want to ride upon thy back. On every simile dost thou here ride toevery truth.Uprightly and openly mayest thou here talk to all things and verilyit soundeth as praise in their ears for one to talk to allthingsdirectlyAnother matter however is forsakenness. For dost thou remember OZarathustra When thy bird screamed overhead when thou stoodest in theforest irresolute ignorant where to go beside a corpseWhen thou spakest Let mine animals lead me More dangerous have Ifound it among men than among animalsTHAT was forsakennessAnd dost thou remember O Zarathustra When thou sattest in thine islea well of wine giving and granting amongst empty buckets bestowing anddistributing amongst the thirstyUntil at last thou alone sattest thirsty amongst the drunken ones andwailedst nightly Is taking not more blessed than giving And stealingyet more blessed than takingTHAT was forsakennessAnd dost thou remember O Zarathustra When thy stillest hour came anddrove thee forth from thyself when with wicked whispering it saidSpeak and succumbWhen it disgusted thee with all thy waiting and silence anddiscouraged thy humble courage THAT was forsakennessO lonesomeness My home lonesomeness How blessedly and tenderlyspeaketh thy voice unto meWe do not question each other we do not complain to each other we gotogether openly through open doors.For all is open with thee and clear and even the hours run here onlighter feet. For in the dark time weigheth heavier upon one than inthe light.Here fly open unto me all beings words and wordcabinets here allbeing wanteth to become words here all becoming wanteth to learn of mehow to talk.Down there howeverall talking is in vain There forgetting andpassingby are the best wisdom THAT have I learned nowHe who would understand everything in man must handle everything. Butfor that I have too clean hands.I do not like even to inhale their breath alas that I have lived solong among their noise and bad breathsO blessed stillness around me O pure odours around me How from a deepbreast this stillness fetcheth pure breath How it hearkeneth thisblessed stillnessBut down therethere speaketh everything there is everything misheard.If one announce ones wisdom with bells the shopmen in the marketplacewill outjingle it with penniesEverything among them talketh no one knoweth any longer how tounderstand. Everything falleth into the water nothing falleth anylonger into deep wells.Everything among them talketh nothing succeedeth any longer andaccomplisheth itself. Everything cackleth but who will still sitquietly on the nest and hatch eggsEverything among them talketh everything is outtalked. And that whichyesterday was still too hard for time itself and its tooth hangethtoday outchamped and outchewed from the mouths of the men of today.Everything among them talketh everything is betrayed. And what was oncecalled the secret and secrecy of profound souls belongeth today to thestreettrumpeters and other butterflies.O human hubbub thou wonderful thing Thou noise in dark streets Nowart thou again behind memy greatest danger lieth behind meIn indulging and pitying lay ever my greatest danger and all humanhubbub wisheth to be indulged and tolerated.With suppressed truths with fools hand and befooled heart and rich inpetty lies of pitythus have I ever lived among men.Disguised did I sit amongst them ready to misjudge MYSELF that I mightendure THEM and willingly saying to myself Thou fool thou dost notknow menOne unlearneth men when one liveth amongst them there is too muchforeground in all menwhat can farseeing farlonging eyes do THEREAnd fool that I was when they misjudged me I indulged them on thataccount more than myself being habitually hard on myself and ofteneven taking revenge on myself for the indulgence.Stung all over by poisonous flies and hollowed like the stone bymany drops of wickedness thus did I sit among them and still said tomyself Innocent is everything petty of its pettinessEspecially did I find those who call themselves the good the mostpoisonous flies they sting in all innocence they lie in all innocencehow COULD theybe just towards meHe who liveth amongst the goodpity teacheth him to lie. Pity makethstifling air for all free souls. For the stupidity of the good isunfathomable.To conceal myself and my richesTHAT did I learn down there for everyone did I still find poor in spirit. It was the lie of my pity that Iknew in every oneThat I saw and scented in every one what was ENOUGH of spirit forhim and what was TOO MUCHTheir stiff wise men I call them wise not stiffthus did I learn toslur over words.The gravediggers dig for themselves diseases. Under old rubbish restbad vapours. One should not stir up the marsh. One should live onmountains.With blessed nostrils do I again breathe mountainfreedom. Freed at lastis my nose from the smell of all human hubbubWith sharp breezes tickled as with sparkling wine SNEEZETH my soulsneezeth and shouteth selfcongratulatingly Health to theeThus spake Zarathustra.LIV. THE THREE EVIL THINGS..In my dream in my last morningdream I stood today on a promontorybeyond the world I held a pair of scales and WEIGHED the world.Alas that the rosy dawn came too early to me she glowed me awake thejealous one Jealous is she always of the glows of my morningdream.Measurable by him who hath time weighable by a good weigher attainableby strong pinions divinable by divine nutcrackers thus did my dreamfind the worldMy dream a bold sailor halfship halfhurricane silent as thebutterfly impatient as the falcon how had it the patience and leisuretoday for worldweighingDid my wisdom perhaps speak secretly to it my laughing wideawakedaywisdom which mocketh at all infinite worlds For it saith Whereforce is there becometh NUMBER the master it hath more force.How confidently did my dream contemplate this finite world notnewfangledly not oldfangledly not timidly not entreatinglyAs if a big round apple presented itself to my hand a ripe goldenapple with a coollysoft velvety skinthus did the world presentitself unto meAs if a tree nodded unto me a broadbranched strongwilled treecurved as a recline and a footstool for weary travellers thus did theworld stand on my promontoryAs if delicate hands carried a casket towards mea casket open forthe delectation of modest adoring eyes thus did the world presentitself before me todayNot riddle enough to scare human love from it not solution enoughto put to sleep human wisdoma humanly good thing was the world to metoday of which such bad things are saidHow I thank my morningdream that I thus at todays dawn weighedthe world As a humanly good thing did it come unto me this dream andheartcomforterAnd that I may do the like by day and imitate and copy its best nowwill I put the three worst things on the scales and weigh them humanlywell.He who taught to bless taught also to curse what are the three bestcursed things in the world These will I put on the scales.VOLUPTUOUSNESS PASSION FOR POWER and SELFISHNESS these three thingshave hitherto been best cursed and have been in worst and falsestreputethese three things will I weigh humanly well.Well Here is my promontory and there is the seaIT rolleth hitherunto me shaggily and fawningly the old faithful hundredheadeddogmonster that I loveWell Here will I hold the scales over the weltering sea and also awitness do I choose to look onthee the anchoritetree thee thestrongodoured broadarched tree that I loveOn what bridge goeth the now to the hereafter By what constraint doththe high stoop to the low And what enjoineth even the highest stilltogrow upwardsNow stand the scales poised and at rest three heavy questions have Ithrown in three heavy answers carrieth the other scale..Voluptuousness unto all hairshirted despisers of the body a sting andstake and cursed as the world by all backworldsmen for it mockethand befooleth all erring misinferring teachers.Voluptuousness to the rabble the slow fire at which it is burntto all wormy wood to all stinking rags the prepared heat and stewfurnace.Voluptuousness to free hearts a thing innocent and free thegardenhappiness of the earth all the futures thanksoverflow to thepresent.Voluptuousness only to the withered a sweet poison to the lionwilledhowever the great cordial and the reverently saved wine of wines.Voluptuousness the great symbolic happiness of a higher happinessand highest hope. For to many is marriage promised and more thanmarriageTo many that are more unknown to each other than man and womanandwho hath fully understood HOW UNKNOWN to each other are man and womanVoluptuousnessbut I will have hedges around my thoughts andeven around my words lest swine and libertine should break into mygardensPassion for power the glowing scourge of the hardest of the hearthardthe cruel torture reserved for the cruellest themselves the gloomyflame of living pyres.Passion for power the wicked gadfly which is mounted on the vainestpeoples the scorner of all uncertain virtue which rideth on everyhorse and on every pride.Passion for power the earthquake which breaketh and upbreaketh allthat is rotten and hollow the rolling rumbling punitive demolisherof whited sepulchres the flashing interrogativesign beside prematureanswers.Passion for power before whose glance man creepeth and croucheth anddrudgeth and becometh lower than the serpent and the swineuntil atlast great contempt crieth out of himPassion for power the terrible teacher of great contempt whichpreacheth to their face to cities and empires Away with theeuntila voice crieth out of themselves Away with MEPassion for power which however mounteth alluringly even to the pureand lonesome and up to selfsatisfied elevations glowing like a lovethat painteth purple felicities alluringly on earthly heavens.Passion for power but who would call it PASSION when the heightlongeth to stoop for power Verily nothing sick or diseased is there insuch longing and descendingThat the lonesome height may not for ever remain lonesome andselfsufficing that the mountains may come to the valleys and the windsof the heights to the plainsOh who could find the right prenomen and honouring name for suchlonging Bestowing virtuethus did Zarathustra once name theunnamable.And then it happened alsoand verily it happened for the firsttimethat his word blessed SELFISHNESS the wholesome healthyselfishness that springeth from the powerful soulFrom the powerful soul to which the high body appertaineth thehandsome triumphing refreshing body around which everything becometha mirrorThe pliant persuasive body the dancer whose symbol and epitomeis the selfenjoying soul. Of such bodies and souls the selfenjoymentcalleth itself virtue.With its words of good and bad doth such selfenjoyment shelter itselfas with sacred groves with the names of its happiness doth it banishfrom itself everything contemptible.Away from itself doth it banish everything cowardly it saithBadTHAT IS cowardly Contemptible seem to it the eversolicitousthe sighing the complaining and whoever pick up the most triflingadvantage.It despiseth also all bittersweet wisdom for verily there is alsowisdom that bloometh in the dark a nightshade wisdom which eversigheth All is vainShy distrust is regarded by it as base and every one who wanteth oathsinstead of looks and hands also all overdistrustful wisdomfor suchis the mode of cowardly souls.Baser still it regardeth the obsequious doggish one who immediatelylieth on his back the submissive one and there is also wisdom that issubmissive and doggish and pious and obsequious.Hateful to it altogether and a loathing is he who will never defendhimself he who swalloweth down poisonous spittle and bad looks thealltoopatient one the allendurer the allsatisfied one for that isthe mode of slaves.Whether they be servile before Gods and divine spurnings or before menand stupid human opinions at ALL kinds of slaves doth it spit thisblessed selfishnessBad thus doth it call all that is spiritbroken andsordidlyservileconstrained blinking eyes depressed hearts and thefalse submissive style which kisseth with broad cowardly lips.And spurious wisdom so doth it call all the wit that slaves andhoaryheaded and weary ones affect and especially all the cunningspuriouswitted curiouswitted foolishness of priestsThe spurious wise however all the priests the worldweary and thosewhose souls are of feminine and servile natureoh how hath their gameall along abused selfishnessAnd precisely THAT was to be virtue and was to be called virtuetoabuse selfishness And selflessso did they wish themselves with goodreason all those worldweary cowards and crossspidersBut to all those cometh now the day the change the sword of judgmentTHE GREAT NOONTIDE then shall many things be revealedAnd he who proclaimeth the EGO wholesome and holy and selfishnessblessed verily he the prognosticator speaketh also what he knowethBEHOLD IT COMETH IT IS NIGH THE GREAT NOONTIDEThus spake Zarathustra.LV. THE SPIRIT OF GRAVITY..My mouthpieceis of the people too coarsely and cordially do Italk for Angora rabbits. And still stranger soundeth my word unto allinkfish and penfoxes.My handis a fools hand woe unto all tables and walls and whateverhath room for fools sketching fools scrawlingMy footis a horsefoot therewith do I trample and trot over stick andstone in the fields up and down and am bedevilled with delight in allfast racing.My stomachis surely an eagles stomach For it preferreth lambsflesh. Certainly it is a birds stomach.Nourished with innocent things and with few ready and impatientto fly to fly awaythat is now my nature why should there not besomething of birdnature thereinAnd especially that I am hostile to the spirit of gravity that isbirdnatureverily deadly hostile supremely hostile originallyhostile Oh whither hath my hostility not flown and misflownThereof could I sing a songand WILL sing it though I be alone in anempty house and must sing it to mine own ears.Other singers are there to be sure to whom only the full housemaketh the voice soft the hand eloquent the eye expressive the heartwakefulthose do I not resemble..He who one day teacheth men to fly will have shifted all landmarks tohim will all landmarks themselves fly into the air the earth will hechristen anewas the light body.The ostrich runneth faster than the fastest horse but it also thrustethits head heavily into the heavy earth thus is it with the man whocannot yet fly.Heavy unto him are earth and life and so WILLETH the spirit of gravityBut he who would become light and be a bird must love himselfthusdo I teach.Not to be sure with the love of the sick and infected for with themstinketh even selfloveOne must learn to love oneselfthus do I teachwith a wholesome andhealthy love that one may endure to be with oneself and not go rovingabout.Such roving about christeneth itself brotherly love with these wordshath there hitherto been the best lying and dissembling and especiallyby those who have been burdensome to every one.And verily it is no commandment for today and tomorrow to LEARN tolove oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finest subtlest last andpatientest.For to its possessor is all possession well concealed and of alltreasurepits ones own is last excavatedso causeth the spirit ofgravity.Almost in the cradle are we apportioned with heavy words and worthsgood and evilso calleth itself this dowry. For the sake of it weare forgiven for living.And therefore suffereth one little children to come unto one to forbidthem betimes to love themselvesso causeth the spirit of gravity.And wewe bear loyally what is apportioned unto us on hard shouldersover rugged mountains And when we sweat then do people say to usYea life is hard to bearBut man himself only is hard to bear The reason thereof is that hecarrieth too many extraneous things on his shoulders. Like the camelkneeleth he down and letteth himself be well laden.Especially the strong loadbearing man in whom reverence resideth. Toomany EXTRANEOUS heavy words and worths loadeth he upon himselfthenseemeth life to him a desertAnd verily Many a thing also that is OUR OWN is hard to bear And manyinternal things in man are like the oysterrepulsive and slippery andhard to graspSo that an elegant shell with elegant adornment must plead forthem. But this art also must one learn to HAVE a shell and a fineappearance and sagacious blindnessAgain it deceiveth about many things in man that many a shell is poorand pitiable and too much of a shell. Much concealed goodness and poweris never dreamt of the choicest dainties find no tastersWomen know that the choicest of them a little fatter a little leaneroh how much fate is in so littleMan is difficult to discover and unto himself most difficult of alloften lieth the spirit concerning the soul. So causeth the spirit ofgravity.He however hath discovered himself who saith This is MY good andevil therewith hath he silenced the mole and the dwarf who say Goodfor all evil for all.Verily neither do I like those who call everything good and this worldthe best of all. Those do I call the allsatisfied.Allsatisfiedness which knoweth how to taste everythingthat isnot the best taste I honour the refractory fastidious tongues andstomachs which have learned to say I and Yea and Nay.To chew and digest everything howeverthat is the genuineswinenature Ever to say YEAthat hath only the ass learnt and thoselike itDeep yellow and hot redso wanteth MY tasteit mixeth blood with allcolours. He however who whitewasheth his house betrayeth unto me awhitewashed soul.With mummies some fall in love others with phantoms both alikehostile to all flesh and bloodoh how repugnant are both to my tasteFor I love blood.And there will I not reside and abide where every one spitteth andspeweth that is now MY tasterather would I live amongst thieves andperjurers. Nobody carrieth gold in his mouth.Still more repugnant unto me however are all lickspittles and themost repugnant animal of man that I found did I christen parasite itwould not love and would yet live by love.Unhappy do I call all those who have only one choice either to becomeevil beasts or evil beasttamers. Amongst such would I not build mytabernacle.Unhappy do I also call those who have ever to WAITthey are repugnantto my tasteall the tollgatherers and traders and kings and otherlandkeepers and shopkeepers.Verily I learned waiting also and thoroughly sobut only waiting forMYSELF. And above all did I learn standing and walking and running andleaping and climbing and dancing.This however is my teaching he who wisheth one day to fly must firstlearn standing and walking and running and climbing and dancingonedoth not fly into flyingWith ropeladders learned I to reach many a window with nimble legs didI climb high masts to sit on high masts of perception seemed to me nosmall blissTo flicker like small flames on high masts a small light certainlybut a great comfort to castaway sailors and shipwrecked onesBy divers ways and wendings did I arrive at my truth not by one ladderdid I mount to the height where mine eye roveth into my remoteness.And unwillingly only did I ask my waythat was always counter to mytaste Rather did I question and test the ways themselves.A testing and a questioning hath been all my travellingand verilyone must also LEARN to answer such questioning That howeveris mytasteNeither a good nor a bad taste but MY taste of which I have nolonger either shame or secrecy.Thisis now MY waywhere is yours Thus did I answer those whoasked me the way. For THE wayit doth not existThus spake Zarathustra.LVI. OLD AND NEW TABLES..Here do I sit and wait old broken tables around me and also newhalfwritten tables. When cometh mine hourThe hour of my descent of my downgoing for once more will I go untomen.For that hour do I now wait for first must the signs come unto me thatit is MINE hournamely the laughing lion with the flock of doves.Meanwhile do I talk to myself as one who hath time. No one telleth meanything new so I tell myself mine own story..When I came unto men then found I them resting on an old infatuationall of them thought they had long known what was good and bad for men.An old wearisome business seemed to them all discourse about virtue andhe who wished to sleep well spake of good and bad ere retiring torest.This somnolence did I disturb when I taught that NO ONE YET KNOWETH whatis good and badunless it be the creating oneIt is he however who createth mans goal and giveth to the earthits meaning and its future he only EFFECTETH it THAT aught is good orbad.And I bade them upset their old academic chairs and wherever that oldinfatuation had sat I bade them laugh at their great moralists theirsaints their poets and their Saviours.At their gloomy sages did I bid them laugh and whoever had satadmonishing as a black scarecrow on the tree of life.On their great gravehighway did I seat myself and even beside thecarrion and vulturesand I laughed at all their bygone and its mellowdecaying glory.Verily like penitential preachers and fools did I cry wrath and shameon all their greatness and smallness. Oh that their best is so verysmall Oh that their worst is so very small Thus did I laugh.Thus did my wise longing born in the mountains cry and laugh in me awild wisdom verilymy great pinionrustling longing.And oft did it carry me off and up and away and in the midst oflaughter then flew I quivering like an arrow with sunintoxicatedraptureOut into distant futures which no dream hath yet seen into warmersouths than ever sculptor conceivedwhere gods in their dancing areashamed of all clothesThat I may speak in parables and halt and stammer like the poets andverily I am ashamed that I have still to be a poetWhere all becoming seemed to me dancing of Gods and wantoning of Godsand the world unloosed and unbridled and fleeing back to itselfAs an eternal selffleeing and reseeking of one another of many Godsas the blessed selfcontradicting recommuning and refraternising withone another of many GodsWhere all time seemed to me a blessed mockery of moments wherenecessity was freedom itself which played happily with the goad offreedomWhere I also found again mine old devil and archenemy the spiritof gravity and all that it created constraint law necessity andconsequence and purpose and will and good and evilFor must there not be that which is danced OVER danced beyond Mustthere not for the sake of the nimble the nimblestbe moles andclumsy dwarfs.There was it also where I picked up from the path the word Superman and that man is something that must be surpassed.That man is a bridge and not a goalrejoicing over his noontides andevenings as advances to new rosy dawnsThe Zarathustra word of the great noontide and whatever else I havehung up over men like purple eveningafterglows.Verily also new stars did I make them see along with new nightsand over cloud and day and night did I spread out laughter like agaycoloured canopy.I taught them all MY poetisation and aspiration to compose and collectinto unity what is fragment in man and riddle and fearful chanceAs composer riddlereader and redeemer of chance did I teach themto create the future and all that HATH BEENto redeem by creating.The past of man to redeem and every It was to transform until theWill saith But so did I will it So shall I will itThis did I call redemption this alone taught I them to callredemption.Now do I await MY redemptionthat I may go unto them for the last time.For once more will I go unto men AMONGST them will my sun set in dyingwill I give them my choicest giftFrom the sun did I learn this when it goeth down the exuberant onegold doth it then pour into the sea out of inexhaustible richesSo that the poorest fisherman roweth even with GOLDEN oars For thisdid I once see and did not tire of weeping in beholding it.Like the sun will also Zarathustra go down now sitteth he hereand waiteth old broken tables around him and also newtableshalfwritten..Behold here is a new table but where are my brethren who will carry itwith me to the valley and into hearts of fleshThus demandeth my great love to the remotest ones BE NOT CONSIDERATE OFTHY NEIGHBOUR Man is something that must be surpassed.There are many divers ways and modes of surpassing see THOU theretoBut only a buffoon thinketh man can also be OVERLEAPT.Surpass thyself even in thy neighbour and a right which thou canstseize upon shalt thou not allow to be given theeWhat thou doest can no one do to thee again. Lo there is no requital.He who cannot command himself shall obey. And many a one CAN commandhimself but still sorely lacketh selfobedience.Thus wisheth the type of noble souls they desire to have nothingGRATUITOUSLY least of all life.He who is of the populace wisheth to live gratuitously we othershowever to whom life hath given itselfwe are ever considering WHAT wecan best give IN RETURNAnd verily it is a noble dictum which saith What life promiseth USthat promise will WE keepto lifeOne should not wish to enjoy where one doth not contribute to theenjoyment. And one should not WISH to enjoyFor enjoyment and innocence are the most bashful things. Neither liketo be sought for. One should HAVE thembut one should rather SEEK forguilt and pain.O my brethren he who is a firstling is ever sacrificed. Now howeverare we firstlingsWe all bleed on secret sacrificial altars we all burn and broil inhonour of ancient idols.Our best is still young this exciteth old palates. Our flesh is tenderour skin is only lambs skinhow could we not excite old idolpriestsIN OURSELVES dwelleth he still the old idolpriest who broileth ourbest for his banquet. Ah my brethren how could firstlings fail to besacrificesBut so wisheth our type and I love those who do not wish to preservethemselves the downgoing ones do I love with mine entire love forthey go beyond..To be truethat CAN few be And he who can will not Least of allhowever can the good be true.Oh those good ones GOOD MEN NEVER SPEAK THE TRUTH. For the spiritthus to be good is a malady.They yield those good ones they submit themselves their heartrepeateth their soul obeyeth HE however who obeyeth DOTH NOT LISTENTO HIMSELFAll that is called evil by the good must come together in order thatone truth may be born. O my brethren are ye also evil enough for THIStruthThe daring venture the prolonged distrust the cruel Nay the tediumthe cuttingintothequickhow seldom do THESE come together Out ofsuch seed howeveris truth producedBESIDE the bad conscience hath hitherto grown all KNOWLEDGE Break upbreak up ye discerning ones the old tables.When the water hath planks when gangways and railings oerspan thestream verily he is not believed who then saith All is in flux.But even the simpletons contradict him. What say the simpletons allin flux Planks and railings are still OVER the streamOVER the stream all is stable all the values of things the bridgesand bearings all good and evil these are all STABLECometh however the hard winter the streamtamer then learn even thewittiest distrust and verily not only the simpletons then say Shouldnot everythingSTAND STILLFundamentally standeth everything stillthat is an appropriate winterdoctrine good cheer for an unproductive period a great comfort forwintersleepers and firesideloungers.Fundamentally standeth everything still but CONTRARY theretopreacheth the thawing windThe thawing wind a bullock which is no ploughing bullocka furiousbullock a destroyer which with angry horns breaketh the ice The icehoweverBREAKETH GANGWAYSO my brethren is not everything AT PRESENT IN FLUX Have not allrailings and gangways fallen into the water Who would still HOLD ON togood and evilWoe to us Hail to us The thawing wind blowethThus preach mybrethren through all the streets.There is an old illusionit is called good and evil. Around soothsayersand astrologers hath hitherto revolved the orbit of this illusion.Once did one BELIEVE in soothsayers and astrologers and THEREFORE didone believe Everything is fate thou shalt for thou mustThen again did one distrust all soothsayers and astrologers andTHEREFORE did one believe Everything is freedom thou canst for thouwillestO my brethren concerning the stars and the future there hath hithertobeen only illusion and not knowledge and THEREFORE concerning good andevil there hath hitherto been only illusion and not knowledge.Thou shalt not rob Thou shalt not slaysuch precepts were oncecalled holy before them did one bow the knee and the head and take offones shoes.But I ask you Where have there ever been better robbers and slayers inthe world than such holy preceptsIs there not even in all liferobbing and slaying And for suchprecepts to be called holy was not TRUTH itself therebyslainOr was it a sermon of death that called holy what contradicted anddissuaded from lifeO my brethren break up break up for me the oldtables.It is my sympathy with all the past that I see it is abandonedAbandoned to the favour the spirit and the madness of everygeneration that cometh and reinterpreteth all that hath been as itsbridgeA great potentate might arise an artful prodigy who with approval anddisapproval could strain and constrain all the past until it became forhim a bridge a harbinger a herald and a cockcrowing.This however is the other danger and mine other sympathyhe who isof the populace his thoughts go back to his grandfatherwith hisgrandfather however doth time cease.Thus is all the past abandoned for it might some day happen for thepopulace to become master and drown all time in shallow waters.Therefore O my brethren a NEW NOBILITY is needed which shall be theadversary of all populace and potentate rule and shall inscribe anewthe word noble on new tables.For many noble ones are needed and many kinds of noble ones FOR A NEWNOBILITY Or as I once said in parable That is just divinity thatthere are Gods but no God.O my brethren I consecrate you and point you to a new nobility yeshall become procreators and cultivators and sowers of the futureVerily not to a nobility which ye could purchase like traders withtraders gold for little worth is all that hath its price.Let it not be your honour henceforth whence ye come but whither ye goYour Will and your feet which seek to surpass youlet these be your newhonourVerily not that ye have served a princeof what account are princesnownor that ye have become a bulwark to that which standeth that itmay stand more firmly.Not that your family have become courtly at courts and that ye havelearnedgaycoloured like the flamingoto stand long hours in shallowpoolsFor ABILITYtostand is a merit in courtiers and all courtiers believethat unto blessedness after death pertainethPERMISSIONtositNor even that a Spirit called Holy led your forefathers into promisedlands which I do not praise for where the worst of all trees grewthecrossin that land there is nothing to praiseAnd verily wherever this Holy Spirit led its knights always insuch campaigns didgoats and geese and wryheads and guyheads runFOREMOSTO my brethren not backward shall your nobility gaze but OUTWARDExiles shall ye be from all fatherlands and forefatherlandsYour CHILDRENS LAND shall ye love let this love be your newnobilitythe undiscovered in the remotest seas For it do I bid yoursails search and searchUnto your children shall ye MAKE AMENDS for being the children of yourfathers all the past shall ye THUS redeem This new table do I placeover you.Why should one live All is vain To livethat is to thrash straw tolivethat is to burn oneself and yet not get warm.Such ancient babbling still passeth for wisdom because it is oldhowever and smelleth mustily THEREFORE is it the more honoured. Evenmould ennobleth.Children might thus speak they SHUN the fire because it hath burntthem There is much childishness in the old books of wisdom.And he who ever thrasheth straw why should he be allowed to rail atthrashing Such a fool one would have to muzzleSuch persons sit down to the table and bring nothing with them not evengood hungerand then do they rail All is vainBut to eat and drink well my brethren is verily no vain art Break upbreak up for me the tables of the neverjoyous ones.To the clean are all things cleanthus say the people. I howeversay unto you To the swine all things become swinishTherefore preach the visionaries and bowedheads whose hearts are alsobowed down The world itself is a filthy monster.For these are all unclean spirits especially those however who haveno peace or rest unless they see the world FROM THE BACKSIDEthebackworldsmenTO THOSE do I say it to the face although it sound unpleasantly theworld resembleth man in that it hath a backsideSO MUCH is trueThere is in the world much filth SO MUCH is true But the world itselfis not therefore a filthy monsterThere is wisdom in the fact that much in the world smelleth badlyloathing itself createth wings and fountaindivining powersIn the best there is still something to loathe and the best is stillsomething that must be surpassedO my brethren there is much wisdom in the fact that much filth is inthe world.Such sayings did I hear pious backworldsmen speak to their consciencesand verily without wickedness or guilealthough there is nothing moreguileful in the world or more wicked.Let the world be as it is Raise not a finger against itLet whoever will choke and stab and skin and scrape the people raisenot a finger against it Thereby will they learn to renounce the world.And thine own reasonthis shalt thou thyself stifle and choke for itis a reason of this worldthereby wilt thou learn thyself to renouncethe world.Shatter shatter O my brethren those old tables of the pious Tatterthe maxims of the worldmaligners.He who learneth much unlearneth all violent cravingsthat do peoplenow whisper to one another in all the dark lanes.Wisdom wearieth nothing is worth while thou shalt not cravethisnew table found I hanging even in the public markets.Break up for me O my brethren break up also that NEW table Thewearyotheworld put it up and the preachers of death and the jailerfor lo it is also a sermon for slaveryBecause they learned badly and not the best and everything too earlyand everything too fast because they ATE badly from thence hathresulted their ruined stomachFor a ruined stomach is their spirit IT persuadeth to death Forverily my brethren the spirit IS a stomachLife is a well of delight but to him in whom the ruined stomachspeaketh the father of affliction all fountains are poisoned.To discern that is DELIGHT to the lionwilled But he who hath becomeweary is himself merely willed with him play all the waves.And such is always the nature of weak men they lose themselves on theirway. And at last asketh their weariness Why did we ever go on the wayAll is indifferentTO THEM soundeth it pleasant to have preached in their ears Nothing isworth while Ye shall not will That however is a sermon for slavery.O my brethren a fresh blustering wind cometh Zarathustra unto allwayweary ones many noses will he yet make sneezeEven through walls bloweth my free breath and in into prisons andimprisoned spiritsWilling emancipateth for willing is creating so do I teach. And ONLYfor creating shall ye learnAnd also the learning shall ye LEARN only from me the learningwellHe who hath ears let him hear.There standeth the boatthither goeth it over perhaps into vastnothingnessbut who willeth to enter into this PerhapsNone of you want to enter into the deathboat How should ye then beWORLDWEARY onesWorldweary ones And have not even withdrawn from the earth Eagerdid I ever find you for the earth amorous still of your ownearthwearinessNot in vain doth your lip hang downa small worldly wish still sitteththereon And in your eyefloateth there not a cloudlet of unforgottenearthly blissThere are on the earth many good inventions some useful some pleasantfor their sake is the earth to be loved.And many such good inventions are there that they are like womansbreasts useful at the same time and pleasant.Ye worldweary ones however Ye earthidlers You shall one beat withstripes With stripes shall one again make you sprightly limbs.For if ye be not invalids or decrepit creatures of whom the earth isweary then are ye sly sloths or dainty sneaking pleasurecats. And ifye will not again RUN gaily then shall yepass awayTo the incurable shall one not seek to be a physician thus teachethZarathustraso shall ye pass awayBut more COURAGE is needed to make an end than to make a new verse thatdo all physicians and poets know well..O my brethren there are tables which weariness framed and tableswhich slothfulness framed corrupt slothfulness although they speaksimilarly they want to be heard differently.See this languishing one Only a spanbreadth is he from his goal butfrom weariness hath he lain down obstinately in the dust this braveoneFrom weariness yawneth he at the path at the earth at the goal and athimself not a step further will he gothis brave oneNow gloweth the sun upon him and the dogs lick at his sweat but helieth there in his obstinacy and preferreth to languishA spanbreadth from his goal to languish Verily ye will have todrag him into his heaven by the hair of his headthis heroBetter still that ye let him lie where he hath lain down that sleep maycome unto him the comforter with cooling patterrain.Let him lie until of his own accord he awakenethuntil of his ownaccord he repudiateth all weariness and what weariness hath taughtthrough himOnly my brethren see that ye scare the dogs away from him the idleskulkers and all the swarming verminAll the swarming vermin of the cultured thatfeast on the sweat ofevery hero.I form circles around me and holy boundaries ever fewer ascend withme ever higher mountains I build a mountainrange out of ever holiermountains.But wherever ye would ascend with me O my brethren take care lest aPARASITE ascend with youA parasite that is a reptile a creeping cringing reptile that triethto fatten on your infirm and sore places.And THIS is its art it divineth where ascending souls are weary inyour trouble and dejection in your sensitive modesty doth it build itsloathsome nest.Where the strong are weak where the noble are alltoogentletherebuildeth it its loathsome nest the parasite liveth where the great havesmall sore places.What is the highest of all species of being and what is the lowestThe parasite is the lowest species he however who is of the highestspecies feedeth most parasites.For the soul which hath the longest ladder and can go deepest down howcould there fail to be most parasites upon itThe most comprehensive soul which can run and stray and rove furthestin itself the most necessary soul which out of joy flingeth itselfinto chanceThe soul in Being which plungeth into Becoming the possessing soulwhich SEEKETH to attain desire and longingThe soul fleeing from itself which overtaketh itself in the widestcircuit the wisest soul unto which folly speaketh most sweetlyThe soul most selfloving in which all things have their current andcountercurrent their ebb and their flowoh how could THE LOFTIESTSOUL fail to have the worst parasites.O my brethren am I then cruel But I say What falleth that shall onealso pushEverything of todayit falleth it decayeth who would preserve itBut II wish also to push itKnow ye the delight which rolleth stones into precipitous depthsThosemen of today see just how they roll into my depthsA prelude am I to better players O my brethren An example DOaccording to mine exampleAnd him whom ye do not teach to fly teach I pray youTO FALL FASTER.I love the brave but it is not enough to be a swordsmanone must alsoknow WHEREON to use swordsmanshipAnd often is it greater bravery to keep quiet and pass by that THEREBYone may reserve oneself for a worthier foeYe shall only have foes to be hated but not foes to be despised yemust be proud of your foes. Thus have I already taught.For the worthier foe O my brethren shall ye reserve yourselvestherefore must ye pass by many a oneEspecially many of the rabble who din your ears with noise aboutpeople and peoples.Keep your eye clear of their For and Against There is there much rightmuch wrong he who looketh on becometh wroth.Therein viewing therein hewingthey are the same thing thereforedepart into the forests and lay your sword to sleepGo YOUR ways and let the people and peoples go theirsgloomy waysverily on which not a single hope glinteth any moreLet there the trader rule where all that still glittereth istradersgold. It is the time of kings no longer that which now calleth itselfthe people is unworthy of kings.See how these peoples themselves now do just like the traders they pickup the smallest advantage out of all kinds of rubbishThey lay lures for one another they lure things out of oneanotherthat they call good neighbourliness. O blessed remote periodwhen a people said to itself I will beMASTER over peoplesFor my brethren the best shall rule the best also WILLETH to ruleAnd where the teaching is different therethe best is LACKING..If THEY hadbread for nothing alas for what would THEY cry Theirmaintainmentthat is their true entertainment and they shall have ithardBeasts of prey are they in their workingthere is even plunderingin their earningthere is even overreaching Therefore shall theyhave it hardBetter beasts of prey shall they thus become subtler cleverer MOREMANLIKE for man is the best beast of prey.All the animals hath man already robbed of their virtues that is why ofall animals it hath been hardest for man.Only the birds are still beyond him. And if man should yet learn to flyalas TO WHAT HEIGHTwould his rapacity fly.Thus would I have man and woman fit for war the one fit formaternity the other both however fit for dancing with head and legs.And lost be the day to us in which a measure hath not been danced. Andfalse be every truth which hath not had laughter along with it.Your marriagearranging see that it be not a bad ARRANGING Ye havearranged too hastily so there FOLLOWETH therefrommarriagebreakingAnd better marriagebreaking than marriagebendingmarriagelyingThus spake a woman unto me Indeed I broke themarriage but first did the marriage breakmeThe badly paired found I ever the most revengeful they make every onesuffer for it that they no longer run singly.On that account want I the honest ones to say to one another We loveeach other let us SEE TO IT that we maintain our love Or shall ourpledging be blunderingGive us a set term and a small marriage that we may see if we arefit for the great marriage It is a great matter always to be twain.Thus do I counsel all honest ones and what would be my love to theSuperman and to all that is to come if I should counsel and speakotherwiseNot only to propagate yourselves onwards but UPWARDSthereto O mybrethren may the garden of marriage help you.He who hath grown wise concerning old origins lo he will at last seekafter the fountains of the future and new origins.O my brethren not long will it be until NEW PEOPLES shall arise and newfountains shall rush down into new depths.For the earthquakeit choketh up many wells it causeth muchlanguishing but it bringeth also to light inner powers and secrets.The earthquake discloseth new fountains. In the earthquake of oldpeoples new fountains burst forth.And whoever calleth out Lo here is a well for many thirsty ones oneheart for many longing ones one will for many instrumentsaround himcollecteth a PEOPLE that is to say many attempting ones.Who can command who must obeyTHAT IS THERE ATTEMPTED Ah with whatlong seeking and solving and failing and learning and reattemptingHuman society it is an attemptso I teacha long seeking it seekethhowever the rulerAn attempt my brethren And NO contract Destroy I pray youdestroy that word of the softhearted and halfandhalf.O my brethren With whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole humanfuture Is it not with the good and justAs those who say and feel in their hearts We already know whatis good and just we possess it also woe to those who still seekthereafterAnd whatever harm the wicked may do the harm of the good is theharmfulest harmAnd whatever harm the worldmaligners may do the harm of the good isthe harmfulest harmO my brethren into the hearts of the good and just looked some oneonce on a time who said They are the Pharisees. But people did notunderstand him.The good and just themselves were not free to understand him theirspirit was imprisoned in their good conscience. The stupidity of thegood is unfathomably wise.It is the truth however that the good MUST be Phariseesthey have nochoiceThe good MUST crucify him who deviseth his own virtue That IS thetruthThe second one however who discovered their countrythe countryheart and soil of the good and justit was he who asked Whom do theyhate mostThe CREATOR hate they most him who breaketh the tables and old valuesthe breakerhim they call the lawbreaker.For the goodthey CANNOT create they are always the beginning of theendThey crucify him who writeth new values on new tables they sacrificeUNTO THEMSELVES the futurethey crucify the whole human futureThe goodthey have always been the beginning of the end..O my brethren have ye also understood this word And what I once saidof the last manWith whom lieth the greatest danger to the whole human future Is it notwith the good and justBREAK UP BREAK UP I PRAY YOU THE GOOD AND JUSTO my brethren haveye understood also this word.Ye flee from me Ye are frightened Ye tremble at this wordO my brethren when I enjoined you to break up the good and the tablesof the good then only did I embark man on his high seas.And now only cometh unto him the great terror the great outlook thegreat sickness the great nausea the great seasickness.False shores and false securities did the good teach you in the lies ofthe good were ye born and bred. Everything hath been radically contortedand distorted by the good.But he who discovered the country of man discovered also the countryof mans future. Now shall ye be sailors for me brave patientKeep yourselves up betimes my brethren learn to keep yourselves upThe sea stormeth many seek to raise themselves again by you.The sea stormeth all is in the sea. Well Cheer up Ye oldseamanheartsWhat of fatherland THITHER striveth our helm where our CHILDRENS LANDis Thitherwards stormier than the sea stormeth our great longing.Why so hardsaid to the diamond one day the charcoal are we thennot near relativesWhy so soft O my brethren thus do I ask you are ye then notmybrethrenWhy so soft so submissive and yielding Why is there so much negationand abnegation in your hearts Why is there so little fate in yourlooksAnd if ye will not be fates and inexorable ones how can ye one dayconquer with meAnd if your hardness will not glance and cut and chip to pieces how canye one daycreate with meFor the creators are hard. And blessedness must it seem to you to pressyour hand upon millenniums as upon waxBlessedness to write upon the will of millenniums as uponbrassharder than brass nobler than brass. Entirely hard is only thenoblest.This new table O my brethren put I up over you BECOME HARD.O thou my Will Thou change of every need MY needfulness Preserve mefrom all small victoriesThou fatedness of my soul which I call fate Thou Inme OvermePreserve and spare me for one great fateAnd thy last greatness my Will spare it for thy lastthat thou mayestbe inexorable IN thy victory Ah who hath not succumbed to his victoryAh whose eye hath not bedimmed in this intoxicated twilight Ah whosefoot hath not faltered and forgotten in victoryhow to standThat I may one day be ready and ripe in the great noontide ready andripe like the glowing ore the lightningbearing cloud and the swellingmilkudderReady for myself and for my most hidden Will a bow eager for itsarrow an arrow eager for its starA star ready and ripe in its noontide glowing pierced blessed byannihilating sunarrowsA sun itself and an inexorable sunwill ready for annihilation invictoryO Will thou change of every need MY needfulness Spare me for onegreat victoryThus spake Zarathustra.LVII. THE CONVALESCENT..One morning not long after his return to his cave Zarathustra sprangup from his couch like a madman crying with a frightful voice andacting as if some one still lay on the couch who did not wish to rise.Zarathustras voice also resounded in such a manner that his animalscame to him frightened and out of all the neighbouring caves andlurkingplaces all the creatures slipped awayflying flutteringcreeping or leaping according to their variety of foot or wing.Zarathustra however spake these wordsUp abysmal thought out of my depth I am thy cock and morning dawnthou overslept reptile Up Up My voice shall soon crow thee awakeUnbind the fetters of thine ears listen For I wish to hear thee UpUp There is thunder enough to make the very graves listenAnd rub the sleep and all the dimness and blindness out of thine eyesHear me also with thine eyes my voice is a medicine even for those bornblind.And once thou art awake then shalt thou ever remain awake. It is notMY custom to awake greatgrandmothers out of their sleep that I may bidthemsleep onThou stirrest stretchest thyself wheezest Up Up Not wheeze shaltthoubut speak unto me Zarathustra calleth thee Zarathustra thegodlessI Zarathustra the advocate of living the advocate of suffering theadvocate of the circuitthee do I call my most abysmal thoughtJoy to me Thou comestI hear thee Mine abyss SPEAKETH my lowestdepth have I turned over into the lightJoy to me Come hither Give me thy handha let be ahaDisgustdisgust disgustalas to me.Hardly however had Zarathustra spoken these words when he fell downas one dead and remained long as one dead. When however he again cameto himself then was he pale and trembling and remained lying and forlong he would neither eat nor drink. This condition continued for sevendays his animals however did not leave him day nor night except thatthe eagle flew forth to fetch food. And what it fetched and foragedit laid on Zarathustras couch so that Zarathustra at last lay amongyellow and red berries grapes rosy apples sweetsmelling herbage andpinecones. At his feet however two lambs were stretched which theeagle had with difficulty carried off from their shepherds.At last after seven days Zarathustra raised himself upon his couchtook a rosy apple in his hand smelt it and found its smell pleasant.Then did his animals think the time had come to speak unto him.O Zarathustra said they now hast thou lain thus for seven days withheavy eyes wilt thou not set thyself again upon thy feetStep out of thy cave the world waiteth for thee as a garden. The windplayeth with heavy fragrance which seeketh for thee and all brookswould like to run after thee.All things long for thee since thou hast remained alone for sevendaysstep forth out of thy cave All things want to be thy physiciansDid perhaps a new knowledge come to thee a bitter grievous knowledgeLike leavened dough layest thou thy soul arose and swelled beyond allits bounds.O mine animals answered Zarathustra talk on thus and let me listenIt refresheth me so to hear your talk where there is talk there is theworld as a garden unto me.How charming it is that there are words and tones are not words andtones rainbows and seeming bridges twixt the eternally separatedTo each soul belongeth another world to each soul is every other soul abackworld.Among the most alike doth semblance deceive most delightfully for thesmallest gap is most difficult to bridge over.For mehow could there be an outsideofme There is no outside Butthis we forget on hearing tones how delightful it is that we forgetHave not names and tones been given unto things that man may refreshhimself with them It is a beautiful folly speaking therewith dancethman over everything.How lovely is all speech and all falsehoods of tones With tones dancethour love on variegated rainbows.O Zarathustra said then his animals to those who think like usthings all dance themselves they come and hold out the hand and laughand fleeand return.Everything goeth everything returneth eternally rolleth the wheelof existence. Everything dieth everything blossometh forth againeternally runneth on the year of existence.Everything breaketh everything is integrated anew eternally buildethitself the same house of existence. All things separate all thingsagain greet one another eternally true to itself remaineth the ring ofexistence.Every moment beginneth existence around every Here rolleth the ballThere. The middle is everywhere. Crooked is the path of eternity.O ye wags and barrelorgans answered Zarathustra and smiled oncemore how well do ye know what had to be fulfilled in seven daysAnd how that monster crept into my throat and choked me But I bit offits head and spat it away from me.And yeye have made a lyrelay out of it Now however do I lie herestill exhausted with that biting and spittingaway still sick with mineown salvation.AND YE LOOKED ON AT IT ALL O mine animals are ye also cruel Didye like to look at my great pain as men do For man is the cruellestanimal.At tragedies bullfights and crucifixions hath he hitherto beenhappiest on earth and when he invented his hell behold that was hisheaven on earth.When the great man crieth immediately runneth the little man thitherand his tongue hangeth out of his mouth for very lusting. He howevercalleth it his pity.The little man especially the poethow passionately doth he accuselife in words Hearken to him but do not fail to hear the delight whichis in all accusationSuch accusers of lifethem life overcometh with a glance of the eye.Thou lovest me saith the insolent one wait a little as yet have Ino time for thee.Towards himself man is the cruellest animal and in all who callthemselves sinners and bearers of the cross and penitents do notoverlook the voluptuousness in their plaints and accusationsAnd I myselfdo I thereby want to be mans accuser Ah mine animalsthis only have I learned hitherto that for man his baddest is necessaryfor his bestThat all that is baddest is the best POWER and the hardest stone forthe highest creator and that man must become better AND badderNot to THIS torturestake was I tied that I know man is badbut Icried as no one hath yet criedAh that his baddest is so very small Ah that his best is so verysmallThe great disgust at manIT strangled me and had crept into my throatand what the soothsayer had presaged All is alike nothing is worthwhile knowledge strangleth.A long twilight limped on before me a fatally weary fatallyintoxicated sadness which spake with yawning mouth.Eternally he returneth the man of whom thou art weary the smallmanso yawned my sadness and dragged its foot and could not go tosleep.A cavern became the human earth to me its breast caved in everythingliving became to me human dust and bones and mouldering past.My sighing sat on all human graves and could no longer arise mysighing and questioning croaked and choked and gnawed and nagged dayand nightAh man returneth eternally The small man returneth eternallyNaked had I once seen both of them the greatest man and the smallestman all too like one anotherall too human even the greatest manAll too small even the greatest manthat was my disgust at man Andthe eternal return also of the smallest manthat was my disgust at allexistenceAh Disgust Disgust DisgustThus spake Zarathustra and sighed andshuddered for he remembered his sickness. Then did his animals preventhim from speaking further.Do not speak further thou convalescentso answered his animalsbut go out where the world waiteth for thee like a garden.Go out unto the roses the bees and the flocks of doves Especiallyhowever unto the singing birds to learn SINGING from themFor singing is for the convalescent the sound ones may talk. Andwhen the sound also want songs then want they other songs than theconvalescent.O ye wags and barrelorgans do be silent answered Zarathustra andsmiled at his animals. How well ye know what consolation I devised formyself in seven daysThat I have to sing once moreTHAT consolation did I devise for myselfand THIS convalescence would ye also make another lyrelay thereofDo not talk further answered his animals once more rather thouconvalescent prepare for thyself first a lyre a new lyreFor behold O Zarathustra For thy new lays there are needed new lyres.Sing and bubble over O Zarathustra heal thy soul with new lays thatthou mayest bear thy great fate which hath not yet been any ones fateFor thine animals know it well O Zarathustra who thou art and mustbecome behold THOU ART THE TEACHER OF THE ETERNAL RETURNthat is nowTHY fateThat thou must be the first to teach this teachinghow could this greatfate not be thy greatest danger and infirmityBehold we know what thou teachest that all things eternally returnand ourselves with them and that we have already existed times withoutnumber and all things with us.Thou teachest that there is a great year of Becoming a prodigy of agreat year it must like a sandglass ever turn up anew that it mayanew run down and run outSo that all those years are like one another in the greatest and alsoin the smallest so that we ourselves in every great year are likeourselves in the greatest and also in the smallest.And if thou wouldst now die O Zarathustra behold we know also howthou wouldst then speak to thyselfbut thine animals beseech thee notto die yetThou wouldst speak and without trembling buoyant rather with blissfor a great weight and worry would be taken from thee thou patientestoneNow do I die and disappear wouldst thou say and in a moment I amnothing. Souls are as mortal as bodies.But the plexus of causes returneth in which I am intertwinedit willagain create me I myself pertain to the causes of the eternal return.I come again with this sun with this earth with this eagle with thisserpentNOT to a new life or a better life or a similar lifeI come again eternally to this identical and selfsame life in itsgreatest and its smallest to teach again the eternal return of allthingsTo speak again the word of the great noontide of earth and man toannounce again to man the Superman.I have spoken my word. I break down by my word so willeth mine eternalfateas announcer do I succumbThe hour hath now come for the downgoer to bless himself. ThusENDETHZarathustras downgoing.When the animals had spoken these words they were silent and waited sothat Zarathustra might say something to them but Zarathustra did nothear that they were silent. On the contrary he lay quietly with closedeyes like a person sleeping although he did not sleep for he communedjust then with his soul. The serpent however and the eagle when theyfound him silent in such wise respected the great stillness around himand prudently retired.LVIII. THE GREAT LONGING.O my soul I have taught thee to say today as once on a time andformerly and to dance thy measure over every Here and There andYonder.O my soul I delivered thee from all byplaces I brushed down from theedust and spiders and twilight.O my soul I washed the petty shame and the byplace virtue from theeand persuaded thee to stand naked before the eyes of the sun.With the storm that is called spirit did I blow over thy surgingsea all clouds did I blow away from it I strangled even the stranglercalled sin.O my soul I gave thee the right to say Nay like the storm and to sayYea as the open heaven saith Yea calm as the light remainest thou andnow walkest through denying storms.O my soul I restored to thee liberty over the created and theuncreated and who knoweth as thou knowest the voluptuousness of thefutureO my soul I taught thee the contempt which doth not come likewormeating the great the loving contempt which loveth most where itcontemneth most.O my soul I taught thee so to persuade that thou persuadest even thegrounds themselves to thee like the sun which persuadeth even the seato its height.O my soul I have taken from thee all obeying and kneebending andhomagepaying I have myself given thee the names Change of need andFate.O my soul I have given thee new names and gaycoloured playthingsI have called thee Fate and the Circuit of circuits and theNavelstring of time and the Azure bell.O my soul to thy domain gave I all wisdom to drink all new wines andalso all immemorially old strong wines of wisdom.O my soul every sun shed I upon thee and every night and every silenceand every longingthen grewest thou up for me as a vine.O my soul exuberant and heavy dost thou now stand forth a vine withswelling udders and full clusters of brown golden grapesFilled and weighted by thy happiness waiting from superabundance andyet ashamed of thy waiting.O my soul there is nowhere a soul which could be more loving and morecomprehensive and more extensive Where could future and past be closertogether than with theeO my soul I have given thee everything and all my hands have becomeempty by theeand now Now sayest thou to me smiling and full ofmelancholy Which of us oweth thanksDoth the giver not owe thanks because the receiver received Isbestowing not a necessity Is receiving notpityingO my soul I understand the smiling of thy melancholy thineoverabundance itself now stretcheth out longing handsThy fulness looketh forth over raging seas and seeketh and waiteth thelonging of overfulness looketh forth from the smiling heaven of thineeyesAnd verily O my soul Who could see thy smiling and not meltinto tears The angels themselves melt into tears through theovergraciousness of thy smiling.Thy graciousness and overgraciousness is it which will not complainand weep and yet O my soul longeth thy smiling for tears and thytrembling mouth for sobs.Is not all weeping complaining And all complaining accusing Thusspeakest thou to thyself and therefore O my soul wilt thou rathersmile than pour forth thy griefThan in gushing tears pour forth all thy grief concerning thyfulness and concerning the craving of the vine for the vintager andvintageknifeBut wilt thou not weep wilt thou not weep forth thy purple melancholythen wilt thou have to SING O my soulBehold I smile myself whoforetell thee thisThou wilt have to sing with passionate song until all seas turn calmto hearken unto thy longingUntil over calm longing seas the bark glideth the golden marvelaround the gold of which all good bad and marvellous things friskAlso many large and small animals and everything that hath lightmarvellous feet so that it can run on violetblue pathsTowards the golden marvel the spontaneous bark and its master hehowever is the vintager who waiteth with the diamond vintageknifeThy great deliverer O my soul the nameless onefor whom futuresongs only will find names And verily already hath thy breath thefragrance of future songsAlready glowest thou and dreamest already drinkest thou thirstily atall deep echoing wells of consolation already reposeth thy melancholyin the bliss of future songsO my soul now have I given thee all and even my last possession andall my hands have become empty by theeTHAT I BADE THEE SING beholdthat was my last thing to giveThat I bade thee singsay now say WHICH of us nowoweth thanksBetter still however sing unto me sing O my soul And let me thanktheeThus spake Zarathustra.LIX. THE SECOND DANCESONG..Into thine eyes gazed I lately O Life gold saw I gleam in thynighteyesmy heart stood still with delightA golden bark saw I gleam on darkened waters a sinking drinkingreblinking golden swingbarkAt my dancefrantic foot dost thou cast a glance a laughingquestioning melting thrown glanceTwice only movedst thou thy rattle with thy little handsthen did myfeet swing with dancefury.My heels reared aloft my toes they hearkenedthee they would knowhath not the dancer his earin his toeUnto thee did I spring then fledst thou back from my bound and towardsme waved thy fleeing flying tresses roundAway from thee did I spring and from thy snaky tresses then stoodstthou there halfturned and in thine eye caresses.With crooked glancesdost thou teach me crooked courses on crookedcourses learn my feetcrafty fanciesI fear thee near I love thee far thy flight allureth me thy seekingsecureth meI suffer but for thee what would I not gladly bearFor thee whose coldness inflameth whose hatred misleadeth whoseflight enchaineth whose mockerypleadethWho would not hate thee thou great bindress inwindress temptressseekress findress Who would not love thee thou innocent impatientwindswift childeyed sinnerWhither pullest thou me now thou paragon and tomboy And now foolestthou me fleeing thou sweet romp dost annoyI dance after thee I follow even faint traces lonely. Where art thouGive me thy hand Or thy finger onlyHere are caves and thickets we shall go astrayHalt Stand stillSeest thou not owls and bats in fluttering frayThou bat Thou owl Thou wouldst play me foul Where are we From thedogs hast thou learned thus to bark and howl.Thou gnashest on me sweetly with little white teeth thine evil eyesshoot out upon me thy curly little mane from underneathThis is a dance over stock and stone I am the hunterwilt thou be myhound or my chamois anonNow beside me And quickly wickedly springing Now up And overAlasI have fallen myself overswingingOh see me lying thou arrogant one and imploring grace Gladly would Iwalk with theein some lovelier placeIn the paths of love through bushes variegated quiet trim Or therealong the lake where goldfishes dance and swimThou art now aweary There above are sheep and sunset stripes is itnot sweet to sleepthe shepherd pipesThou art so very weary I carry thee thither let just thine arm sinkAnd art thou thirstyI should have something but thy mouth would notlike it to drinkOh that cursed nimble supple serpent and lurkingwitch Where artthou gone But in my face do I feel through thy hand two spots and redblotches itchI am verily weary of it ever thy sheepish shepherd to be. Thou witchif I have hitherto sung unto thee now shalt THOUcry unto meTo the rhythm of my whip shalt thou dance and cry I forget not mywhipNot I.Then did Life answer me thus and kept thereby her fine ears closedO Zarathustra Crack not so terribly with thy whip Thou knowest surelythat noise killeth thoughtand just now there came to me such delicatethoughts.We are both of us genuine neerdowells and neerdoills. Beyondgood and evil found we our island and our green meadowwe two aloneTherefore must we be friendly to each otherAnd even should we not love each other from the bottom of ourheartsmust we then have a grudge against each other if we do not loveeach other perfectlyAnd that I am friendly to thee and often too friendly that knowestthou and the reason is that I am envious of thy Wisdom. Ah this madold fool WisdomIf thy Wisdom should one day run away from thee ah then would also mylove run away from thee quickly.Thereupon did Life look thoughtfully behind and around and said softlyO Zarathustra thou art not faithful enough to meThou lovest me not nearly so much as thou sayest I know thou thinkestof soon leaving me.There is an old heavy heavy boomingclock it boometh by night up tothy caveWhen thou hearest this clock strike the hours at midnight thenthinkest thou between one and twelve thereonThou thinkest thereon O Zarathustra I know itof soon leavingmeYea answered I hesitatingly but thou knowest it alsoAnd Isaid something into her ear in amongst her confused yellow foolishtresses.Thou KNOWEST that O Zarathustra That knoweth no oneAnd we gazed at each other and looked at the green meadow oer whichthe cool evening was just passing and we wept together.Then howeverwas Life dearer unto me than all my Wisdom had ever been.Thus spake Zarathustra..OneO man Take heedTwoWhat saith deep midnights voice indeedThreeI slept my sleepFourFrom deepest dream Ive woke and pleadFiveThe world is deepSixAnd deeper than the day could read.SevenDeep is its woeEightJoydeeper still than grief can beNineWoe saith Hence GoTenBut joys all want eternityElevenWant deep profound eternityTwelveLX. THE SEVEN SEALS.OR THE YEA AND AMEN LAY..If I be a diviner and full of the divining spirit which wandereth onhigh mountainridges twixt two seasWandereth twixt the past and the future as a heavy cloudhostile tosultry plains and to all that is weary and can neither die nor liveReady for lightning in its dark bosom and for the redeeming flash oflight charged with lightnings which say Yea which laugh Yea ready fordivining flashes of lightningBlessed however is he who is thus charged And verily long must hehang like a heavy tempest on the mountain who shall one day kindle thelight of the futureOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITY.If ever my wrath hath burst graves shifted landmarks or rolled oldshattered tables into precipitous depthsIf ever my scorn hath scattered mouldered words to the winds and if Ihave come like a besom to crossspiders and as a cleansing wind to oldcharnelhousesIf ever I have sat rejoicing where old Gods lie buried worldblessingworldloving beside the monuments of old worldmalignersFor even churches and Godsgraves do I love if only heaven lookeththrough their ruined roofs with pure eyes gladly do I sit like grassand red poppies on ruined churchesOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITY.If ever a breath hath come to me of the creative breath and of theheavenly necessity which compelleth even chances to dance stardancesIf ever I have laughed with the laughter of the creative lightningto which the long thunder of the deed followeth grumblingly butobedientlyIf ever I have played dice with the Gods at the divine table ofthe earth so that the earth quaked and ruptured and snorted forthfirestreamsFor a divine table is the earth and trembling with new creativedictums and dicecasts of the GodsOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITY.If ever I have drunk a full draught of the foaming spice andconfectionbowl in which all things are well mixedIf ever my hand hath mingled the furthest with the nearest fire withspirit joy with sorrow and the harshest with the kindestIf I myself am a grain of the saving salt which maketh everything in theconfectionbowl mix wellFor there is a salt which uniteth good with evil and even the evilestis worthy as spicing and as final overfoamingOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITY.If I be fond of the sea and all that is sealike and fondest of it whenit angrily contradicteth meIf the exploring delight be in me which impelleth sails to theundiscovered if the seafarers delight be in my delightIf ever my rejoicing hath called out The shore hath vanishednowhath fallen from me the last chainThe boundless roareth around me far away sparkle for me space andtimewell cheer up old heartOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITY.If my virtue be a dancers virtue and if I have often sprung with bothfeet into goldenemerald raptureIf my wickedness be a laughing wickedness at home among rosebanks andhedges of liliesFor in laughter is all evil present but it is sanctified and absolvedby its own blissAnd if it be my Alpha and Omega that everything heavy shall becomelight every body a dancer and every spirit a bird and verily that ismy Alpha and OmegaOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITY.If ever I have spread out a tranquil heaven above me and have flowninto mine own heaven with mine own pinionsIf I have swum playfully in profound luminous distances and if myfreedoms avian wisdom hath come to meThus however speaketh avian wisdomLo there is no above and nobelow Throw thyself aboutoutward backward thou light one Singspeak no moreAre not all words made for the heavy Do not all words lie to thelight ones Sing speak no moreOh how could I not be ardent for Eternity and for the marriagering ofringsthe ring of the returnNever yet have I found the woman by whom I should like to have childrenunless it be this woman whom I love for I love thee O EternityFOR I LOVE THEE O ETERNITYFOURTH AND LAST PART.Ah where in the world have there been greater follies than with thepitiful And what in the world hath caused more suffering than thefollies of the pitifulWoe unto all loving ones who have not an elevation which is above theirpityThus spake the devil unto me once on a time Even God hath his hellit is his love for man.And lately did I hear him say these words God is dead of his pity forman hath God died.ZARATHUSTRA II. The Pitiful.LXI. THE HONEY SACRIFICE.And again passed moons and years over Zarathustras soul and heheeded it not his hair however became white. One day when he sat ona stone in front of his cave and gazed calmly into the distanceonethere gazeth out on the sea and away beyond sinuous abyssesthen wenthis animals thoughtfully round about him and at last set themselves infront of him.O Zarathustra said they gazest thou out perhaps for thyhappinessOf what account is my happiness answered he I havelong ceased to strive any more for happiness I strive for my work.OZarathustra said the animals once more that sayest thou as onewho hath overmuch of good things. Liest thou not in a skyblue lake ofhappinessYe wags answered Zarathustra and smiled how well didye choose the simile But ye know also that my happiness is heavy andnot like a fluid wave of water it presseth me and will not leave meand is like molten pitch.Then went his animals again thoughtfully around him and placedthemselves once more in front of him. O Zarathustra said they it isconsequently FOR THAT REASON that thou thyself always becometh yellowerand darker although thy hair looketh white and flaxen Lo thou sittestin thy pitchWhat do ye say mine animals said Zarathustralaughing verily I reviled when I spake of pitch. As it happeneth withme so is it with all fruits that turn ripe. It is the HONEY in my veinsthat maketh my blood thicker and also my soul stiller.So will itbe O Zarathustra answered his animals and pressed up to him butwilt thou not today ascend a high mountain The air is pure and todayone seeth more of the world than ever.Yea mine animals answeredhe ye counsel admirably and according to my heart I will todayascend a high mountain But see that honey is there ready to handyellow white good icecool goldencombhoney. For know that whenaloft I will make the honey sacrifice.When Zarathustra however was aloft on the summit he sent his animalshome that had accompanied him and found that he was now alonethen helaughed from the bottom of his heart looked around him and spake thusThat I spake of sacrifices and honeysacrifices it was merely a rusein talking and verily a useful folly Here aloft can I now speak freerthan in front of mountaincaves and anchorites domestic animals.What to sacrifice I squander what is given me a squanderer with athousand hands how could I call thatsacrificingAnd when I desired honey I only desired bait and sweet mucus andmucilage for which even the mouths of growling bears and strangesulky evil birds waterThe best bait as huntsmen and fishermen require it. For if the worldbe as a gloomy forest of animals and a pleasureground for all wildhuntsmen it seemeth to me ratherand preferablya fathomless richseaA sea full of manyhued fishes and crabs for which even the Godsmight long and might be tempted to become fishers in it and casters ofnetsso rich is the world in wonderful things great and smallEspecially the human world the human seatowards IT do I now throwout my golden anglerod and say Open up thou human abyssOpen up and throw unto me thy fish and shining crabs With my best baitshall I allure to myself today the strangest human fishMy happiness itself do I throw out into all places far and wide twixtorient noontide and occident to see if many human fish will not learnto hug and tug at my happinessUntil biting at my sharp hidden hooks they have to come up unto MYheight the motleyest abyssgroundlings to the wickedest of all fishersof men.For THIS am I from the heart and from the beginningdrawinghitherdrawing upwarddrawing upbringing a drawer a trainer atrainingmaster who not in vain counselled himself once on a timeBecome what thou artThus may men now come UP to me for as yet do I await the signs that itis time for my downgoing as yet do I not myself go down as I must doamongst men.Therefore do I here wait crafty and scornful upon high mountainsno impatient one no patient one rather one who hath even unlearntpatiencebecause he no longer suffereth.For my fate giveth me time it hath forgotten me perhaps Or doth it sitbehind a big stone and catch fliesAnd verily I am well disposed to mine eternal fate because it doth nothound and hurry me but leaveth me time for merriment and mischief sothat I have today ascended this high mountain to catch fish.Did ever any one catch fish upon high mountains And though it be afolly what I here seek and do it is better so than that down below Ishould become solemn with waiting and green and yellowA posturing wrathsnorter with waiting a holy howlstorm fromthe mountains an impatient one that shouteth down into the valleysHearken else I will scourge you with the scourge of GodNot that I would have a grudge against such wrathful ones on thataccount they are well enough for laughter to me Impatient must theynow be those big alarmdrums which find a voice now or neverMyself however and my fatewe do not talk to the Present neitherdo we talk to the Never for talking we have patience and time and morethan time. For one day must it yet come and may not pass by.What must one day come and may not pass by Our great Hazar that isto say our great remote humankingdom the Zarathustrakingdom of athousand yearsHow remote may such remoteness be What doth it concern me But onthat account it is none the less sure unto me with both feet stand Isecure on this groundOn an eternal ground on hard primary rock on this highest hardestprimary mountainridge unto which all winds come as unto thestormparting asking Where and Whence and WhitherHere laugh laugh my hearty healthy wickedness From high mountainscast down thy glittering scornlaughter Allure for me with thyglittering the finest human fishAnd whatever belongeth unto ME in all seas my inandforme in allthingsfish THAT out for me bring THAT up to me for that do I waitthe wickedest of all fishcatchers.Out out my fishinghook In and down thou bait of my happiness Dripthy sweetest dew thou honey of my heart Bite my fishinghook intothe belly of all black afflictionLook out look out mine eye Oh how many seas round about me whatdawning human futures And above mewhat rosy red stillness Whatunclouded silenceLXII. THE CRY OF DISTRESS.The next day sat Zarathustra again on the stone in front of his cavewhilst his animals roved about in the world outside to bring home newfoodalso new honey for Zarathustra had spent and wasted the oldhoney to the very last particle. When he thus sat however with astick in his hand tracing the shadow of his figure on the earth andreflectingverily not upon himself and his shadowall at once hestartled and shrank back for he saw another shadow beside his own.And when he hastily looked around and stood up behold there stood thesoothsayer beside him the same whom he had once given to eat and drinkat his table the proclaimer of the great weariness who taught All isalike nothing is worth while the world is without meaning knowledgestrangleth. But his face had changed since then and when Zarathustralooked into his eyes his heart was startled once more so much evilannouncement and ashygrey lightnings passed over that countenance.The soothsayer who had perceived what went on in Zarathustras soulwiped his face with his hand as if he would wipe out the impressionthe same did also Zarathustra. And when both of them had thus silentlycomposed and strengthened themselves they gave each other the hand asa token that they wanted once more to recognise each other.Welcome hither said Zarathustra thou soothsayer of the greatweariness not in vain shalt thou once have been my messmate and guest.Eat and drink also with me today and forgive it that a cheerful oldman sitteth with thee at tableA cheerful old man answered thesoothsayer shaking his head but whoever thou art or wouldst be OZarathustra thou hast been here aloft the longest timein a littlewhile thy bark shall no longer rest on dry landDo I then reston dry landasked Zarathustra laughing.The waves around thymountain answered the soothsayer rise and rise the waves of greatdistress and affliction they will soon raise thy bark also and carrythee away.Thereupon was Zarathustra silent and wondered.Dost thoustill hear nothing continued the soothsayer doth it not rush androar out of the depthZarathustra was silent once more and listenedthen heard he a long long cry which the abysses threw to one anotherand passed on for none of them wished to retain it so evil did itsound.Thou ill announcer said Zarathustra at last that is a cry ofdistress and the cry of a man it may come perhaps out of a black sea.But what doth human distress matter to me My last sin which hath beenreserved for meknowest thou what it is calledPITY answered the soothsayer from an overflowing heart and raisedboth his hands aloftO Zarathustra I have come that I may seduce theeto thy last sinAnd hardly had those words been uttered when there sounded the cryonce more and longer and more alarming than beforealso much nearer.Hearest thou Hearest thou O Zarathustra called out the soothsayerthe cry concerneth thee it calleth thee Come come come it is timeit is the highest timeZarathustra was silent thereupon confused and staggered at last heasked like one who hesitateth in himself And who is it that therecalleth meBut thou knowest it certainly answered the soothsayer warmly whydost thou conceal thyself It is THE HIGHER MAN that crieth for theeThe higher man cried Zarathustra horrorstricken what wanteth HEWhat wanteth HE The higher man What wanteth he hereand his skincovered with perspiration.The soothsayer however did not heed Zarathustras alarm but listenedand listened in the downward direction. When however it had been stillthere for a long while he looked behind and saw Zarathustra standingtrembling.O Zarathustra he began with sorrowful voice thou dost not standthere like one whose happiness maketh him giddy thou wilt have to dancelest thou tumble downBut although thou shouldst dance before me and leap all thy sideleapsno one may say unto me Behold here danceth the last joyous manIn vain would any one come to this height who sought HIM here caveswould he find indeed and backcaves hidingplaces for hidden onesbut not lucky mines nor treasurechambers nor new goldveins ofhappiness.Happinesshow indeed could one find happiness among such buriedaliveand solitary ones Must I yet seek the last happiness on the HappyIsles and far away among forgotten seasBut all is alike nothing is worth while no seeking is of servicethere are no longer any Happy IslesThus sighed the soothsayer with his last sigh however Zarathustraagain became serene and assured like one who hath come out of a deepchasm into the light. Nay Nay Three times Nay exclaimed he with astrong voice and stroked his beardTHAT do I know better There arestill Happy Isles Silence THEREON thou sighing sorrowsackCease to splash THEREON thou raincloud of the forenoon Do I notalready stand here wet with thy misery and drenched like a dogNow do I shake myself and run away from thee that I may again becomedry thereat mayest thou not wonder Do I seem to thee discourteousHere however is MY court.But as regards the higher man well I shall seek him at once in thoseforests FROM THENCE came his cry. Perhaps he is there hard beset by anevil beast.He is in MY domain therein shall he receive no scath And verily thereare many evil beasts about me.With those words Zarathustra turned around to depart. Then said thesoothsayer O Zarathustra thou art a rogueI know it well thou wouldst fain be rid of me Rather wouldst thou runinto the forest and lay snares for evil beastsBut what goodwill it do thee In the evening wilt thou have me againin thine own cave will I sit patient and heavy like a blockand waitfor theeSo be it shouted back Zarathustra as he went away and what is minein my cave belongeth also unto thee my guestShouldst thou however find honey therein well just lick it up thougrowling bear and sweeten thy soul For in the evening we want both tobe in good spiritsIn good spirits and joyful because this day hath come to an end Andthou thyself shalt dance to my lays as my dancingbear.Thou dost not believe this Thou shakest thy head Well Cheer up oldbear But I alsoam a soothsayer.Thus spake Zarathustra.LXIII. TALK WITH THE KINGS..Ere Zarathustra had been an hour on his way in the mountains andforests he saw all at once a strange procession. Right on the pathwhich he was about to descend came two kings walking bedecked withcrowns and purple girdles and variegated like flamingoes they drovebefore them a laden ass. What do these kings want in my domain saidZarathustra in astonishment to his heart and hid himself hastily behinda thicket. When however the kings approached to him he said halfaloudlike one speaking only to himself Strange Strange How doth thisharmonise Two kings do I seeand only one assThereupon the two kings made a halt they smiled and looked towards thespot whence the voice proceeded and afterwards looked into each othersfaces. Such things do we also think among ourselves said the king onthe right but we do not utter them.The king on the left however shrugged his shoulders and answeredThat may perhaps be a goatherd. Or an anchorite who hath lived toolong among rocks and trees. For no society at all spoileth also goodmanners.Good manners replied angrily and bitterly the other king whatthen do we run out of the way of Is it not good manners Our goodsocietyBetter verily to live among anchorites and goatherds than withour gilded false overrouged populacethough it call itself goodsociety.Though it call itself nobility. But there all is false and foulabove all the bloodthanks to old evil diseases and worse curers.The best and dearest to me at present is still a sound peasant coarseartful obstinate and enduring that is at present the noblest type.The peasant is at present the best and the peasant type should bemaster But it is the kingdom of the populaceI no longer allowanything to be imposed upon me. The populace howeverthat meanethhodgepodge.Populacehodgepodge therein is everything mixed with everything saintand swindler gentleman and Jew and every beast out of Noahs ark.Good manners Everything is false and foul with us. No one knoweth anylonger how to reverence it is THAT precisely that we run away from.They are fulsome obtrusive dogs they gild palmleaves.This loathing choketh me that we kings ourselves have become falsedraped and disguised with the old faded pomp of our ancestorsshowpieces for the stupidest the craftiest and whosoever at presenttrafficketh for power.We ARE NOT the first menand have nevertheless to STAND FOR them ofthis imposture have we at last become weary and disgusted.From the rabble have we gone out of the way from all those bawlers andscribeblowflies from the traderstench the ambitionfidgeting thebad breath fie to live among the rabbleFie to stand for the first men among the rabble Ah loathingLoathing Loathing What doth it now matter about us kingsThine old sickness seizeth thee said here the king on the left thyloathing seizeth thee my poor brother. Thou knowest however that someone heareth us.Immediately thereupon Zarathustra who had opened ears and eyes to thistalk rose from his hidingplace advanced towards the kings and thusbeganHe who hearkeneth unto you he who gladly hearkeneth unto you iscalled Zarathustra.I am Zarathustra who once said What doth it now matter about kingsForgive me I rejoiced when ye said to each other What doth it matterabout us kingsHere however is MY domain and jurisdiction what may ye be seeking inmy domain Perhaps however ye have FOUND on your way what I seeknamely the higher man.When the kings heard this they beat upon their breasts and said withone voice We are recognisedWith the sword of thine utterance severest thou the thickest darkness ofour hearts. Thou hast discovered our distress for lo we are on our wayto find the higher manThe man that is higher than we although we are kings. To him do weconvey this ass. For the highest man shall also be the highest lord onearth.There is no sorer misfortune in all human destiny than when the mightyof the earth are not also the first men. Then everything becometh falseand distorted and monstrous.And when they are even the last men and more beast than man thenriseth and riseth the populace in honour and at last saith even thepopulacevirtue Lo I alone am virtueWhat have I just heard answered Zarathustra. What wisdom in kings Iam enchanted and verily I have already promptings to make a rhymethereonEven if it should happen to be a rhyme not suited for every onesears. I unlearned long ago to have consideration for long ears. Wellthen Well nowHere however it happened that the ass also found utterance it saiddistinctly and with malevolence YEA.Twas oncemethinks year one of our blessed LordDrunk without winethe Sybil thus deploredHow ill things go Decline Decline Neersank the world so low Rome now hath turned harlot and harlotstewRomes Caesar a beast and Godhath turned Jew.With those rhymes of Zarathustra the kings were delighted the king onthe right however said O Zarathustra how well it was that we setout to see theeFor thine enemies showed us thy likeness in their mirror there lookedstthou with the grimace of a devil and sneeringly so that we were afraidof thee.But what good did it do Always didst thou prick us anew in heart andear with thy sayings. Then did we say at last What doth it matter howhe lookWe must HEAR him him who teacheth Ye shall love peace as a means tonew wars and the short peace more than the longNo one ever spake such warlike words What is good To be brave isgood. It is the good war that halloweth every cause.O Zarathustra our fathers blood stirred in our veins at such words itwas like the voice of spring to old winecasks.When the swords ran among one another like redspotted serpents thendid our fathers become fond of life the sun of every peace seemed tothem languid and lukewarm the long peace however made them ashamed.How they sighed our fathers when they saw on the wall brightlyfurbished driedup swords Like those they thirsted for war. For asword thirsteth to drink blood and sparkleth with desire.When the kings thus discoursed and talked eagerly of the happiness oftheir fathers there came upon Zarathustra no little desire to mock attheir eagerness for evidently they were very peaceable kings whom hesaw before him kings with old and refined features. But he restrainedhimself. Well said he thither leadeth the way there lieth thecave of Zarathustra and this day is to have a long evening At presenthowever a cry of distress calleth me hastily away from you.It will honour my cave if kings want to sit and wait in it but to besure ye will have to wait longWell What of that Where doth one at present learn better to waitthan at courts And the whole virtue of kings that hath remained untothemis it not called today ABILITY to waitThus spake Zarathustra.LXIV. THE LEECH.And Zarathustra went thoughtfully on further and lower down throughforests and past moory bottoms as it happeneth however to every onewho meditateth upon hard matters he trod thereby unawares upon a man.And lo there spurted into his face all at once a cry of pain and twocurses and twenty bad invectives so that in his fright he raised hisstick and also struck the trodden one. Immediately afterwards howeverhe regained his composure and his heart laughed at the folly he hadjust committed.Pardon me said he to the trodden one who had got up enraged and hadseated himself pardon me and hear first of all a parable.As a wanderer who dreameth of remote things on a lonesome highwayrunneth unawares against a sleeping dog a dog which lieth in the sunAs both of them then start up and snap at each other like deadlyenemies those two beings mortally frightenedso did it happen unto us.And yet And yethow little was lacking for them to caress each otherthat dog and that lonesome one Are they not bothlonesome onesWhoever thou art said the trodden one still enraged thoutreadest also too nigh me with thy parable and not only with thy footLo am I then a dogAnd thereupon the sitting one got up and pulledhis naked arm out of the swamp. For at first he had lain outstretchedon the ground hidden and indiscernible like those who lie in wait forswampgame.But whatever art thou about called out Zarathustra in alarm for hesaw a deal of blood streaming over the naked armwhat hath hurt theeHath an evil beast bit thee thou unfortunate oneThe bleeding one laughed still angry What matter is it to thee saidhe and was about to go on. Here am I at home and in my province.Let him question me whoever will to a dolt however I shall hardlyanswer.Thou art mistaken said Zarathustra sympathetically and held himfast thou art mistaken. Here thou art not at home but in my domainand therein shall no one receive any hurt.Call me however what thou wiltI am who I must be. I call myselfZarathustra.Well Up thither is the way to Zarathustras cave it is not farwiltthou not attend to thy wounds at my homeIt hath gone badly with thee thou unfortunate one in this life firsta beast bit thee and thena man trod upon theeWhen however the trodden one had heard the name of Zarathustra he wastransformed. What happeneth unto me he exclaimed WHO preoccupiethme so much in this life as this one man namely Zarathustra and thatone animal that liveth on blood the leechFor the sake of the leech did I lie here by this swamp like a fisherand already had mine outstretched arm been bitten ten times when therebiteth a still finer leech at my blood Zarathustra himselfO happiness O miracle Praised be this day which enticed me into theswamp Praised be the best the livest cuppingglass that at presentliveth praised be the great conscienceleech ZarathustraThus spake the trodden one and Zarathustra rejoiced at his words andtheir refined reverential style. Who art thou asked he and gavehim his hand there is much to clear up and elucidate between us butalready methinketh pure clear day is dawning.I am THE SPIRITUALLY CONSCIENTIOUS ONE answered he who was askedand in matters of the spirit it is difficult for any one to take itmore rigorously more restrictedly and more severely than I except himfrom whom I learnt it Zarathustra himself.Better know nothing than halfknow many things Better be a fool onones own account than a sage on other peoples approbation Igo tothe basisWhat matter if it be great or small If it be called swamp or skyA handbreadth of basis is enough for me if it be actually basis andgroundA handbreadth of basis thereon can one stand. In the trueknowingknowledge there is nothing great and nothing small.Then thou art perhaps an expert on the leech asked Zarathustra andthou investigatest the leech to its ultimate basis thou conscientiousoneO Zarathustra answered the trodden one that would be somethingimmense how could I presume to do soThat however of which I am master and knower is the BRAIN of theleechthat is MY worldAnd it is also a world Forgive it however that my pride here findethexpression for here I have not mine equal. Therefore said I here am Iat home.How long have I investigated this one thing the brain of the leech sothat here the slippery truth might no longer slip from me Here is MYdomainFor the sake of this did I cast everything else aside for the sake ofthis did everything else become indifferent to me and close beside myknowledge lieth my black ignorance.My spiritual conscience requireth from me that it should be sothat Ishould know one thing and not know all else they are a loathing untome all the semispiritual all the hazy hovering and visionary.Where mine honesty ceaseth there am I blind and want also to be blind.Where I want to know however there want I also to be honestnamelysevere rigorous restricted cruel and inexorable.Because THOU once saidest O Zarathustra Spirit is life which itselfcutteth into lifethat led and allured me to thy doctrine. Andverily with mine own blood have I increased mine own knowledgeAs the evidence indicateth broke in Zarathustra for still was theblood flowing down on the naked arm of the conscientious one. For therehad ten leeches bitten into it.O thou strange fellow how much doth this very evidence teachmenamely thou thyself And not all perhaps might I pour into thyrigorous earWell then We part here But I would fain find thee again. Up thither isthe way to my cave tonight shalt thou there be my welcome guestFain would I also make amends to thy body for Zarathustra treading uponthee with his feet I think about that. Just now however a cry ofdistress calleth me hastily away from thee.Thus spake Zarathustra.LXV. THE MAGICIAN..When however Zarathustra had gone round a rock then saw he on the samepath not far below him a man who threw his limbs about like a maniacand at last tumbled to the ground on his belly. Halt said thenZarathustra to his heart he there must surely be the higher man fromhim came that dreadful cry of distressI will see if I can help him. When however he ran to the spot where the man lay on the groundhe found a trembling old man with fixed eyes and in spite of allZarathustras efforts to lift him and set him again on his feet it wasall in vain. The unfortunate one also did not seem to notice that someone was beside him on the contrary he continually looked around withmoving gestures like one forsaken and isolated from all the world.At last however after much trembling and convulsion andcurlinghimselfup he began to lament thus Who warmth me who lovth me still Give ardent fingers Give heartening charcoalwarmers Prone outstretched trembling Like him half dead and cold whose feet one warmth And shaken ah by unfamiliar fevers Shivering with sharpened icycold frostarrows By thee pursued my fancy Ineffable Recondite Sorefrightening Thou huntsman hind the cloudbanks Now lightningstruck by thee Thou mocking eye that me in darkness watcheth Thus do I lie Bend myself twist myself convulsed With all eternal torture And smitten By thee cruellest huntsman Thou unfamiliarGOD... Smite deeper Smite yet once more Pierce through and rend my heart What meanth this torture With dull indented arrows Why lookst thou hither Of human pain not weary With mischiefloving godly flashglances Not murder wilt thou But torture torture For whyME torture Thou mischiefloving unfamiliar God Ha Ha Thou stealest nigh In midnights gloomy hour... What wilt thou Speak Thou crowdst me pressest Ha now far too closely Thou hearst me breathing Thou oerhearst my heart Thou ever jealous one Of what pray ever jealous Off Off For why the ladder Wouldst thou GET IN To heart inclamber To mine own secretest Conceptions inclamber Shameless one Thou unknown oneThief What seekst thou by thy stealing What seekst thou by thy hearkening What seekst thou by thy torturing Thou torturer ThouhangmanGod Or shall I as the mastiffs do Roll me before thee And cringing enraptured frantical My tail friendlywaggle In vain Goad further Cruellest goader No dogthy game just am I Cruellest huntsman Thy proudest of captives Thou robber hind the cloudbanks ... Speak finally Thou lightningveiled one Thou unknown one Speak What wilt thou highwayambusher fromME What WILT thou unfamiliarGod What Ransomgold How much of ransomgold Solicit muchthat bidth my pride And be concisethat bidth mine other pride Ha Ha MEwantest thou me Entire... Ha Ha And torturest me fool that thou art Deadtorturest quite my pride Give LOVE to mewho warmth me still Who lovth me still Give ardent fingers Give heartening charcoalwarmers Give me the lonesomest The ice ah sevenfold frozen ice For very enemies For foes doth make one thirst Give yield to me Cruellest foe THYSELF Away There fled he surely My final only comrade My greatest foe Mine unfamiliar My hangmanGod... Nay Come thou back WITH all of thy great tortures To me the last of lonesome ones Oh come thou back All my hot tears in streamlets trickle Their course to thee And all my final hearty fervour Upglowth to THEE Oh come thou back Mine unfamiliar God my PAIN My final bliss.Here however Zarathustra could no longer restrain himself he tookhis staff and struck the wailer with all his might. Stop this criedhe to him with wrathful laughter stop this thou stageplayer Thoufalse coiner Thou liar from the very heart I know thee wellI will soon make warm legs to thee thou evil magician I know wellhowto make it hot for such as thouLeave off said the old man and sprang up from the ground strikeme no more O Zarathustra I did it only for amusementThat kind of thing belongeth to mine art. Thee thyself I wanted to putto the proof when I gave this performance. And verily thou hast welldetected meBut thou thyselfhast given me no small proof of thyself thou artHARD thou wise Zarathustra Hard strikest thou with thy truths thycudgel forceth from meTHIS truthFlatter not answered Zarathustra still excited and frowningthou stageplayer from the heart Thou art false why speakest thouoftruthThou peacock of peacocks thou sea of vanity WHAT didst thou representbefore me thou evil magician WHOM was I meant to believe in when thouwailedst in such wiseTHE PENITENT IN SPIRIT said the old man it was himI representedthou thyself once devisedst this expressionThe poet and magician who at last turneth his spirit against himselfthe transformed one who freezeth to death by his bad science andconscience.And just acknowledge it it was long O Zarathustra before thoudiscoveredst my trick and lie Thou BELIEVEDST in my distress when thouheldest my head with both thy handsI heard thee lament we have loved him too little loved him toolittle Because I so far deceived thee my wickedness rejoiced in me.Thou mayest have deceived subtler ones than I said Zarathustrasternly. I am not on my guard against deceivers I HAVE TO BE withoutprecaution so willeth my lot.Thou howeverMUST deceive so far do I know thee Thou must ever beequivocal trivocal quadrivocal and quinquivocal Even what thou hastnow confessed is not nearly true enough nor false enough for meThou bad false coiner how couldst thou do otherwise Thy very maladywouldst thou whitewash if thou showed thyself naked to thy physician.Thus didst thou whitewash thy lie before me when thou saidst I didso ONLY for amusement There was also SERIOUSNESS therein thou ARTsomething of a penitentinspiritI divine thee well thou hast become the enchanter of all the world butfor thyself thou hast no lie or artifice leftthou art disenchanted tothyselfThou hast reaped disgust as thy one truth. No word in thee is any longergenuine but thy mouth is so that is to say the disgust that cleavethunto thy mouth.Who art thou at all cried here the old magician with defiant voicewho dareth to speak thus unto ME the greatest man now livingand agreen flash shot from his eye at Zarathustra. But immediately after hechanged and said sadlyO Zarathustra I am weary of it I am disgusted with mine arts I amnot GREAT why do I dissemble But thou knowest it wellI sought forgreatnessA great man I wanted to appear and persuaded many but the lie hathbeen beyond my power. On it do I collapse.O Zarathustra everything is a lie in me but that I collapsethis mycollapsing is GENUINEIt honoureth thee said Zarathustra gloomily looking down withsidelong glance it honoureth thee that thou soughtest for greatnessbut it betrayeth thee also. Thou art not great.Thou bad old magician THAT is the best and the honestest thing I honourin thee that thou hast become weary of thyself and hast expressed itI am not great.THEREIN do I honour thee as a penitentinspirit and although only forthe twinkling of an eye in that one moment wast thougenuine.But tell me what seekest thou here in MY forests and rocks And if thouhast put thyself in MY way what proof of me wouldst thou haveWherein didst thou put ME to the testThus spake Zarathustra and his eyes sparkled. But the old magician keptsilence for a while then said he Did I put thee to the test Iseekonly.O Zarathustra I seek a genuine one a right one a simple one anunequivocal one a man of perfect honesty a vessel of wisdom a saintof knowledge a great manKnowest thou it not O Zarathustra I SEEK ZARATHUSTRA.And here there arose a long silence between them Zarathustrahowever became profoundly absorbed in thought so that he shut hiseyes. But afterwards coming back to the situation he grasped the handof the magician and said full of politeness and policyWell Up thither leadeth the way there is the cave of Zarathustra. Init mayest thou seek him whom thou wouldst fain find.And ask counsel of mine animals mine eagle and my serpent they shallhelp thee to seek. My cave however is large.I myself to be sureI have as yet seen no great man. That which isgreat the acutest eye is at present insensible to it. It is the kingdomof the populace.Many a one have I found who stretched and inflated himself and thepeople cried Behold a great man But what good do all bellows doThe wind cometh out at last.At last bursteth the frog which hath inflated itself too long thencometh out the wind. To prick a swollen one in the belly I call goodpastime. Hear that ye boysOur today is of the populace who still KNOWETH what is great and whatis small Who could there seek successfully for greatness A fool onlyit succeedeth with fools.Thou seekest for great men thou strange fool Who TAUGHT that to theeIs today the time for it Oh thou bad seeker why dost thoutemptmeThus spake Zarathustra comforted in his heart and went laughing on hisway.LXVI. OUT OF SERVICE.Not long however after Zarathustra had freed himself from themagician he again saw a person sitting beside the path which hefollowed namely a tall black man with a haggard pale countenanceTHIS MAN grieved him exceedingly. Alas said he to his heart theresitteth disguised affliction methinketh he is of the type of thepriests what do THEY want in my domainWhat Hardly have I escaped from that magician and must anothernecromancer again run across my pathSome sorcerer with layingonofhands some sombre wonderworker bythe grace of God some anointed worldmaligner whom may the deviltakeBut the devil is never at the place which would be his right place healways cometh too late that cursed dwarf and clubfootThus cursed Zarathustra impatiently in his heart and considered howwith averted look he might slip past the black man. But behold it cameabout otherwise. For at the same moment had the sitting one alreadyperceived him and not unlike one whom an unexpected happinessovertaketh he sprang to his feet and went straight towardsZarathustra.Whoever thou art thou traveller said he help a strayed one aseeker an old man who may here easily come to griefThe world here is strange to me and remote wild beasts also did I hearhowling and he who could have given me protectionhe is himself nomore.I was seeking the pious man a saint and an anchorite who alone in hisforest had not yet heard of what all the world knoweth at present.WHAT doth all the world know at present asked Zarathustra. Perhapsthat the old God no longer liveth in whom all the world once believedThou sayest it answered the old man sorrowfully. And I served thatold God until his last hour.Now however am I out of service without master and yet not freelikewise am I no longer merry even for an hour except it be inrecollections.Therefore did I ascend into these mountains that I might finally havea festival for myself once more as becometh an old pope andchurchfather for know it that I am the last popea festival ofpious recollections and divine services.Now however is he himself dead the most pious of men the saint inthe forest who praised his God constantly with singing and mumbling.He himself found I no longer when I found his cotbut two wolves foundI therein which howled on account of his deathfor all animals lovedhim. Then did I haste away.Had I thus come in vain into these forests and mountains Then did myheart determine that I should seek another the most pious of allthose who believe not in God my heart determined that I should seekZarathustraThus spake the hoary man and gazed with keen eyes at him who stoodbefore him. Zarathustra however seized the hand of the old pope andregarded it a long while with admiration.Lo thou venerable one said he then what a fine and long hand Thatis the hand of one who hath ever dispensed blessings. Now however dothit hold fast him whom thou seekest me Zarathustra.It is I the ungodly Zarathustra who saith Who is ungodlier than Ithat I may enjoy his teachingThus spake Zarathustra and penetrated with his glances the thoughts andarrearthoughts of the old pope. At last the latter beganHe who most loved and possessed him hath now also lost him mostLo I myself am surely the most godless of us at present But whocould rejoice at thatThou servedst him to the last asked Zarathustra thoughtfully aftera deep silence thou knowest HOW he died Is it true what they saythat sympathy choked himThat he saw how MAN hung on the cross and could not endure itthathis love to man became his hell and at last his deathThe old pope however did not answer but looked aside timidly with apainful and gloomy expression.Let him go said Zarathustra after prolonged meditation stilllooking the old man straight in the eye.Let him go he is gone. And though it honoureth thee that thou speakestonly in praise of this dead one yet thou knowest as well as I WHO hewas and that he went curious ways.To speak before three eyes said the old pope cheerfully he was blindof one eye in divine matters I am more enlightened than Zarathustrahimselfand may well be so.My love served him long years my will followed all his will. A goodservant however knoweth everything and many a thing even which amaster hideth from himself.He was a hidden God full of secrecy. Verily he did not come by hisson otherwise than by secret ways. At the door of his faith standethadultery.Whoever extolleth him as a God of love doth not think highly enough oflove itself. Did not that God want also to be judge But the loving oneloveth irrespective of reward and requital.When he was young that God out of the Orient then was he harsh andrevengeful and built himself a hell for the delight of his favourites.At last however he became old and soft and mellow and pitifulmore like a grandfather than a father but most like a tottering oldgrandmother.There did he sit shrivelled in his chimneycorner fretting on accountof his weak legs worldweary willweary and one day he suffocated ofhis alltoogreat pity.Thou old pope said here Zarathustra interposing hast thou seen THATwith thine eyes It could well have happened in that way in that wayAND also otherwise. When Gods die they always die many kinds of death.Well At all events one way or otherhe is gone He was counter to thetaste of mine ears and eyes worse than that I should not like to sayagainst him.I love everything that looketh bright and speaketh honestly. Buthethou knowest it forsooth thou old priest there was something ofthy type in him the priesttypehe was equivocal.He was also indistinct. How he raged at us this wrathsnorter becausewe understood him badly But why did he not speak more clearlyAnd if the fault lay in our ears why did he give us ears that heard himbadly If there was dirt in our ears well who put it in themToo much miscarried with him this potter who had not learnedthoroughly That he took revenge on his pots and creations howeverbecause they turned out badlythat was a sin against GOOD TASTE.There is also good taste in piety THIS at last said Away with SUCHa God Better to have no God better to set up destiny on ones ownaccount better to be a fool better to be God oneselfWhat do I hear said then the old pope with intent ears OZarathustra thou art more pious than thou believest with such anunbelief Some God in thee hath converted thee to thine ungodliness.Is it not thy piety itself which no longer letteth thee believe in aGod And thine overgreat honesty will yet lead thee even beyond goodand evilBehold what hath been reserved for thee Thou hast eyes and hands andmouth which have been predestined for blessing from eternity. One dothnot bless with the hand alone.Nigh unto thee though thou professest to be the ungodliest one I feela hale and holy odour of long benedictions I feel glad and grievedthereby.Let me be thy guest O Zarathustra for a single night Nowhere on earthshall I now feel better than with theeAmen So shall it be said Zarathustra with great astonishment upthither leadeth the way there lieth the cave of Zarathustra.Gladly forsooth would I conduct thee thither myself thou venerableone for I love all pious men. But now a cry of distress calleth mehastily away from thee.In my domain shall no one come to grief my cave is a good haven. Andbest of all would I like to put every sorrowful one again on firm landand firm legs.Who however could take THY melancholy off thy shoulders For that I amtoo weak. Long verily should we have to wait until some one reawokethy God for thee.For that old God liveth no more he is indeed dead.Thus spake Zarathustra.LXVII. THE UGLIEST MAN.And again did Zarathustras feet run through mountains and forestsand his eyes sought and sought but nowhere was he to be seen whom theywanted to seethe sorely distressed sufferer and crier. On the wholeway however he rejoiced in his heart and was full of gratitude. Whatgood things said he hath this day given me as amends for its badbeginning What strange interlocutors have I foundAt their words will I now chew a long while as at good corn smallshall my teeth grind and crush them until they flow like milk into mysoulWhen however the path again curved round a rock all at once thelandscape changed and Zarathustra entered into a realm of death. Herebristled aloft black and red cliffs without any grass tree or birdsvoice. For it was a valley which all animals avoided even the beasts ofprey except that a species of ugly thick green serpent came here todie when they became old. Therefore the shepherds called this valleySerpentdeath.Zarathustra however became absorbed in dark recollections for itseemed to him as if he had once before stood in this valley. And muchheaviness settled on his mind so that he walked slowly and always moreslowly and at last stood still. Then however when he opened his eyeshe saw something sitting by the wayside shaped like a man and hardlylike a man something nondescript. And all at once there came overZarathustra a great shame because he had gazed on such a thing.Blushing up to the very roots of his white hair he turned aside hisglance and raised his foot that he might leave this illstarred place.Then however became the dead wilderness vocal for from the ground anoise welled up gurgling and rattling as water gurgleth and rattlethat night through stoppedup waterpipes and at last it turned intohuman voice and human speechit sounded thusZarathustra Zarathustra Read my riddle Say say WHAT IS THE REVENGEON THE WITNESSI entice thee back here is smooth ice See to it see to it that thypride doth not here break its legsThou thinkest thyself wise thou proud Zarathustra Read then theriddle thou hard nutcrackerthe riddle that I am Say then who amIWhen however Zarathustra had heard these wordswhat think ye thentook place in his soul PITY OVERCAME HIM and he sank down all atonce like an oak that hath long withstood many treefellersheavilysuddenly to the terror even of those who meant to fell it. Butimmediately he got up again from the ground and his countenance becamestern.I know thee well said he with a brazen voice THOU ART THE MURDEREROF GOD Let me go.Thou couldst not ENDURE him who beheld THEEwho ever beheld theethrough and through thou ugliest man. Thou tookest revenge on thiswitnessThus spake Zarathustra and was about to go but the nondescript graspedat a corner of his garment and began anew to gurgle and seek for words.Stay said he at lastStay Do not pass by I have divined what axe it was that struck theeto the ground hail to thee O Zarathustra that thou art again upon thyfeetThou hast divined I know it well how the man feeleth who killedhimthe murderer of God. Stay Sit down here beside me it is not tono purpose.To whom would I go but unto thee Stay sit down Do not however look atme Honour thusmine uglinessThey persecute me now art THOU my last refuge. NOT with their hatredNOT with their bailiffsOh such persecution would I mock at and beproud and cheerfulHath not all success hitherto been with the wellpersecuted ones Andhe who persecuteth well learneth readily to be OBSEQUENTwhen once heisput behind But it is their PITYTheir pity is it from which I flee away and flee to thee. OZarathustra protect me thou my last refuge thou sole one whodivinedst meThou hast divined how the man feeleth who killed HIM. Stay And ifthou wilt go thou impatient one go not the way that I came. THAT wayis bad.Art thou angry with me because I have already racked language too longBecause I have already counselled thee But know that it is I theugliest manWho have also the largest heaviest feet. Where I have gone the wayis bad. I tread all paths to death and destruction.But that thou passedst me by in silence that thou blushedstI saw itwell thereby did I know thee as Zarathustra.Every one else would have thrown to me his alms his pity in look andspeech. But for thatI am not beggar enough that didst thou divine.For that I am too RICH rich in what is great frightful ugliest mostunutterable Thy shame O Zarathustra HONOURED meWith difficulty did I get out of the crowd of the pitifulthat I mightfind the only one who at present teacheth that pity is obtrusivethyself O ZarathustraWhether it be the pity of a God or whether it be human pity it isoffensive to modesty. And unwillingness to help may be nobler than thevirtue that rusheth to do so.THAT howevernamely pityis called virtue itself at present byall petty peoplethey have no reverence for great misfortune greatugliness great failure.Beyond all these do I look as a dog looketh over the backs of throngingflocks of sheep. They are petty goodwooled goodwilled grey people.As the heron looketh contemptuously at shallow pools with backwardbenthead so do I look at the throng of grey little waves and wills andsouls.Too long have we acknowledged them to be right those petty people SOwe have at last given them power as welland now do they teach thatgood is only what petty people call good.And truth is at present what the preacher spake who himself sprangfrom them that singular saint and advocate of the petty people whotestified of himself Iam the truth.That immodest one hath long made the petty people greatly puffed uphewho taught no small error when he taught Iam the truth.Hath an immodest one ever been answered more courteouslyThouhowever O Zarathustra passedst him by and saidst Nay Nay Threetimes NayThou warnedst against his error thou warnedstthe first to dosoagainst pitynot every one not none but thyself and thy type.Thou art ashamed of the shame of the great sufferer and verily whenthou sayest From pity there cometh a heavy cloud take heed ye menWhen thou teachest All creators are hard all great love is beyondtheir pity O Zarathustra how well versed dost thou seem to me inweathersignsThou thyself howeverwarn thyself also against THY pity For many areon their way to thee many suffering doubting despairing drowningfreezing onesI warn thee also against myself. Thou hast read my best my worstriddle myself and what I have done. I know the axe that felleth thee.But heHAD TO die he looked with eyes which beheld EVERYTHINGhebeheld mens depths and dregs all his hidden ignominy and ugliness.His pity knew no modesty he crept into my dirtiest corners. This mostprying overintrusive overpitiful one had to die.He ever beheld ME on such a witness I would have revengeor not livemyself.The God who beheld everything AND ALSO MAN that God had to die Mancannot ENDURE it that such a witness should live.Thus spake the ugliest man. Zarathustra however got up and prepared togo on for he felt frozen to the very bowels.Thou nondescript said he thou warnedst me against thy path. Asthanks for it I praise mine to thee. Behold up thither is the cave ofZarathustra.My cave is large and deep and hath many corners there findeth hethat is most hidden his hidingplace. And close beside it there area hundred lurkingplaces and byplaces for creeping fluttering andhopping creatures.Thou outcast who hast cast thyself out thou wilt not live amongst menand mens pity Well then do like me Thus wilt thou learn also fromme only the doer learneth.And talk first and foremost to mine animals The proudest animal and thewisest animalthey might well be the right counsellors for us bothThus spake Zarathustra and went his way more thoughtfully and slowlyeven than before for he asked himself many things and hardly knew whatto answer.How poor indeed is man thought he in his heart how ugly howwheezy how full of hidden shameThey tell me that man loveth himself. Ah how great must that selflovebe How much contempt is opposed to itEven this man hath loved himself as he hath despised himselfa greatlover methinketh he is and a great despiser.No one have I yet found who more thoroughly despised himself even THATis elevation. Alas was THIS perhaps the higher man whose cry I heardI love the great despisers. Man is something that hath to besurpassed.LXVIII. THE VOLUNTARY BEGGAR.When Zarathustra had left the ugliest man he was chilled and feltlonesome for much coldness and lonesomeness came over his spirit sothat even his limbs became colder thereby. When however he wanderedon and on uphill and down at times past green meadows though alsosometimes over wild stony couches where formerly perhaps an impatientbrook had made its bed then he turned all at once warmer and heartieragain.What hath happened unto me he asked himself something warm andliving quickeneth me it must be in the neighbourhood.Already am I less alone unconscious companions and brethren rove aroundme their warm breath toucheth my soul.When however he spied about and sought for the comforters of hislonesomeness behold there were kine there standing together on aneminence whose proximity and smell had warmed his heart. The kinehowever seemed to listen eagerly to a speaker and took no heed of himwho approached. When however Zarathustra was quite nigh unto themthen did he hear plainly that a human voice spake in the midst of thekine and apparently all of them had turned their heads towards thespeaker.Then ran Zarathustra up speedily and drove the animals aside for hefeared that some one had here met with harm which the pity of thekine would hardly be able to relieve. But in this he was deceived forbehold there sat a man on the ground who seemed to be persuadingthe animals to have no fear of him a peaceable man andPreacherontheMount out of whose eyes kindness itself preached. Whatdost thou seek here called out Zarathustra in astonishment.What do I here seek answered he the same that thou seekest thoumischiefmaker that is to say happiness upon earth.To that end however I would fain learn of these kine. For I tell theethat I have already talked half a morning unto them and just now werethey about to give me their answer. Why dost thou disturb themExcept we be converted and become as kine we shall in no wise enterinto the kingdom of heaven. For we ought to learn from them one thingruminating.And verily although a man should gain the whole world and yet notlearn one thing ruminating what would it profit him He would not berid of his afflictionHis great affliction that however is at present called DISGUST. Whohath not at present his heart his mouth and his eyes full of disgustThou also Thou also But behold these kineThus spake the PreacherontheMount and turned then his own looktowards Zarathustrafor hitherto it had rested lovingly on the kinethen however he put on a different expression. Who is this with whomI talk he exclaimed frightened and sprang up from the ground.This is the man without disgust this is Zarathustra himself thesurmounter of the great disgust this is the eye this is the mouththis is the heart of Zarathustra himself.And whilst he thus spake he kissed with oerflowing eyes the handsof him with whom he spake and behaved altogether like one to whom aprecious gift and jewel hath fallen unawares from heaven. The kinehowever gazed at it all and wondered.Speak not of me thou strange one thou amiable one said Zarathustraand restrained his affection speak to me firstly of thyself Art thounot the voluntary beggar who once cast away great richesWho was ashamed of his riches and of the rich and fled to the poorestto bestow upon them his abundance and his heart But they received himnot.But they received me not said the voluntary beggar thou knowest itforsooth. So I went at last to the animals and to those kine.Then learnedst thou interrupted Zarathustra how much harder it isto give properly than to take properly and that bestowing well is anARTthe last subtlest masterart of kindness.Especially nowadays answered the voluntary beggar at present thatis to say when everything low hath become rebellious and exclusive andhaughty in its mannerin the manner of the populace.For the hour hath come thou knowest it forsooth for the great evillong slow mobandslaveinsurrection it extendeth and extendethNow doth it provoke the lower classes all benevolence and petty givingand the overrich may be on their guardWhoever at present drip like bulgy bottles out of alltoosmallnecksof such bottles at present one willingly breaketh the necks.Wanton avidity bilious envy careworn revenge populacepride allthese struck mine eye. It is no longer true that the poor are blessed.The kingdom of heaven however is with the kine.And why is it not with the rich asked Zarathustra temptingly whilehe kept back the kine which sniffed familiarly at the peaceful one.Why dost thou tempt me answered the other. Thou knowest it thyselfbetter even than I. What was it drove me to the poorest O ZarathustraWas it not my disgust at the richestAt the culprits of riches with cold eyes and rank thoughts who pickup profit out of all kinds of rubbishat this rabble that stinketh toheavenAt this gilded falsified populace whose fathers were pickpocketsor carrioncrows or ragpickers with wives compliant lewd andforgetfulfor they are all of them not far different from harlotsPopulace above populace below What are poor and rich at presentThat distinction did I unlearnthen did I flee away further and everfurther until I came to those kine.Thus spake the peaceful one and puffed himself and perspired withhis words so that the kine wondered anew. Zarathustra however keptlooking into his face with a smile all the time the man talked soseverelyand shook silently his head.Thou doest violence to thyself thou PreacherontheMount when thouusest such severe words. For such severity neither thy mouth nor thineeye have been given thee.Nor methinketh hath thy stomach either unto IT all such rage andhatred and foamingover is repugnant. Thy stomach wanteth softer thingsthou art not a butcher.Rather seemest thou to me a planteater and a rootman. Perhaps thougrindest corn. Certainly however thou art averse to fleshly joys andthou lovest honey.Thou hast divined me well answered the voluntary beggar withlightened heart. I love honey I also grind corn for I have sought outwhat tasteth sweetly and maketh pure breathAlso what requireth a long time a dayswork and a mouthswork forgentle idlers and sluggards.Furthest to be sure have those kine carried it they have devisedruminating and lying in the sun. They also abstain from all heavythoughts which inflate the heart.Well said Zarathustra thou shouldst also see MINE animals mineeagle and my serpenttheir like do not at present exist on earth.Behold thither leadeth the way to my cave be tonight its guest. Andtalk to mine animals of the happiness of animalsUntil I myself come home. For now a cry of distress calleth me hastilyaway from thee. Also shouldst thou find new honey with me icecoldgoldencombhoney eat itNow however take leave at once of thy kine thou strange one thouamiable one though it be hard for thee. For they are thy warmestfriends and preceptorsOne excepted whom I hold still dearer answered the voluntarybeggar. Thou thyself art good O Zarathustra and better even than acowAway away with thee thou evil flatterer cried Zarathustramischievously why dost thou spoil me with such praise andflatteryhoneyAway away from me cried he once more and heaved his stick at thefond beggar who however ran nimbly away.LXIX. THE SHADOW.Scarcely however was the voluntary beggar gone in haste and Zarathustraagain alone when he heard behind him a new voice which called outStay Zarathustra Do wait It is myself forsooth O Zarathustramyself thy shadow But Zarathustra did not wait for a suddenirritation came over him on account of the crowd and the crowding in hismountains. Whither hath my lonesomeness gone spake he.It is verily becoming too much for me these mountains swarm mykingdom is no longer of THIS world I require new mountains.My shadow calleth me What matter about my shadow Let it run after meIrun away from it.Thus spake Zarathustra to his heart and ran away. But the one behindfollowed after him so that immediately there were three runnersone after the othernamely foremost the voluntary beggar thenZarathustra and thirdly and hindmost his shadow. But not long hadthey run thus when Zarathustra became conscious of his folly and shookoff with one jerk all his irritation and detestation.What said he have not the most ludicrous things always happened tous old anchorites and saintsVerily my folly hath grown big in the mountains Now do I hear six oldfools legs rattling behind one anotherBut doth Zarathustra need to be frightened by his shadow Alsomethinketh that after all it hath longer legs than mine.Thus spake Zarathustra and laughing with eyes and entrails he stoodstill and turned round quicklyand behold he almost thereby threw hisshadow and follower to the ground so closely had the latter followed athis heels and so weak was he. For when Zarathustra scrutinised himwith his glance he was frightened as by a sudden apparition so slenderswarthy hollow and wornout did this follower appear.Who art thou asked Zarathustra vehemently what doest thou here Andwhy callest thou thyself my shadow Thou art not pleasing unto me.Forgive me answered the shadow that it is I and if I please theenotwell O Zarathustra therein do I admire thee and thy good taste.A wanderer am I who have walked long at thy heels always on the waybut without a goal also without a home so that verily I lack littleof being the eternally Wandering Jew except that I am not eternal andnot a Jew.What Must I ever be on the way Whirled by every wind unsettleddriven about O earth thou hast become too round for meOn every surface have I already sat like tired dust have I fallenasleep on mirrors and windowpanes everything taketh from me nothinggiveth I become thinI am almost equal to a shadow.After thee however O Zarathustra did I fly and hie longest andthough I hid myself from thee I was nevertheless thy best shadowwherever thou hast sat there sat I also.With thee have I wandered about in the remotest coldest worlds like aphantom that voluntarily haunteth winter roofs and snows.With thee have I pushed into all the forbidden all the worst and thefurthest and if there be anything of virtue in me it is that I havehad no fear of any prohibition.With thee have I broken up whatever my heart revered allboundarystones and statues have I oerthrown the most dangerous wishesdid I pursueverily beyond every crime did I once go.With thee did I unlearn the belief in words and worths and in greatnames. When the devil casteth his skin doth not his name also fallaway It is also skin. The devil himself is perhapsskin.Nothing is true all is permitted so said I to myself. Into thecoldest water did I plunge with head and heart. Ah how oft did I standthere naked on that account like a red crabAh where have gone all my goodness and all my shame and all my beliefin the good Ah where is the lying innocence which I once possessedthe innocence of the good and of their noble liesToo oft verily did I follow close to the heels of truth then did itkick me on the face. Sometimes I meant to lie and behold then only didI hitthe truth.Too much hath become clear unto me now it doth not concern me any more.Nothing liveth any longer that I lovehow should I still love myselfTo live as I incline or not to live at all so do I wish so wishethalso the holiest. But alas how have I stillinclinationHave Istill a goal A haven towards which MY sail is setA good wind Ah he only who knoweth WHITHER he saileth knoweth whatwind is good and a fair wind for him.What still remaineth to me A heart weary and flippant an unstablewill fluttering wings a broken backbone.This seeking for MY home O Zarathustra dost thou know that thisseeking hath been MY homesickening it eateth me up.WHERE isMY home For it do I ask and seek and have sought buthave not found it. O eternal everywhere O eternal nowhere OeternalinvainThus spake the shadow and Zarathustras countenance lengthened at hiswords. Thou art my shadow said he at last sadly.Thy danger is not small thou free spirit and wanderer Thou hast had abad day see that a still worse evening doth not overtake theeTo such unsettled ones as thou seemeth at last even a prisoner blessed.Didst thou ever see how captured criminals sleep They sleep quietlythey enjoy their new security.Beware lest in the end a narrow faith capture thee a hard rigorousdelusion For now everything that is narrow and fixed seduceth andtempteth thee.Thou hast lost thy goal. Alas how wilt thou forego and forget thatloss Therebyhast thou also lost thy wayThou poor rover and rambler thou tired butterfly wilt thou have a restand a home this evening Then go up to my caveThither leadeth the way to my cave. And now will I run quickly away fromthee again. Already lieth as it were a shadow upon me.I will run alone so that it may again become bright around me.Therefore must I still be a long time merrily upon my legs. In theevening however there will bedancing with meThus spake Zarathustra.LXX. NOONTIDE.And Zarathustra ran and ran but he found no one else and was aloneand ever found himself again he enjoyed and quaffed his solitude andthought of good thingsfor hours. About the hour of noontide howeverwhen the sun stood exactly over Zarathustras head he passed an oldbent and gnarled tree which was encircled round by the ardent love ofa vine and hidden from itself from this there hung yellow grapes inabundance confronting the wanderer. Then he felt inclined to quench alittle thirst and to break off for himself a cluster of grapes. Whenhowever he had already his arm outstretched for that purpose he feltstill more inclined for something elsenamely to lie down beside thetree at the hour of perfect noontide and sleep.This Zarathustra did and no sooner had he laid himself on the ground inthe stillness and secrecy of the variegated grass than he had forgottenhis little thirst and fell asleep. For as the proverb of Zarathustrasaith One thing is more necessary than the other. Only that his eyesremained openfor they never grew weary of viewing and admiring thetree and the love of the vine. In falling asleep however Zarathustraspake thus to his heartHush Hush Hath not the world now become perfect What hath happenedunto meAs a delicate wind danceth invisibly upon parqueted seas lightfeatherlight sodanceth sleep upon me.No eye doth it close to me it leaveth my soul awake. Light is itverily featherlight.It persuadeth me I know not how it toucheth me inwardly with acaressing hand it constraineth me. Yea it constraineth me so that mysoul stretcheth itself outHow long and weary it becometh my strange soul Hath a seventhdayevening come to it precisely at noontide Hath it already wandered toolong blissfully among good and ripe thingsIt stretcheth itself out longlonger it lieth still my strangesoul. Too many good things hath it already tasted this golden sadnessoppresseth it it distorteth its mouth.As a ship that putteth into the calmest coveit now draweth up tothe land weary of long voyages and uncertain seas. Is not the land morefaithfulAs such a ship huggeth the shore tuggeth the shorethen it sufficethfor a spider to spin its thread from the ship to the land. No strongerropes are required there.As such a weary ship in the calmest cove so do I also now repose nighto the earth faithful trusting waiting bound to it with the lightestthreads.O happiness O happiness Wilt thou perhaps sing O my soul Thou liestin the grass. But this is the secret solemn hour when no shepherdplayeth his pipe.Take care Hot noontide sleepeth on the fields. Do not sing Hush Theworld is perfect.Do not sing thou prairiebird my soul Do not even whisper LohushThe old noontide sleepeth it moveth its mouth doth it not just nowdrink a drop of happinessAn old brown drop of golden happiness golden wine Something whiskethover it its happiness laugheth. Thuslaugheth a God. HushFor happiness how little sufficeth for happiness Thus spake Ionce and thought myself wise. But it was a blasphemy THAT have I nowlearned. Wise fools speak better.The least thing precisely the gentlest thing the lightest thing alizards rustling a breath a whisk an eyeglanceLITTLE maketh upthe BEST happiness. HushWhat hath befallen me Hark Hath time flown away Do I not fall HaveI not fallenhark into the well of eternityWhat happeneth to me Hush It stingeth mealasto the heart Tothe heart Oh break up break up my heart after such happiness aftersuch a stingWhat Hath not the world just now become perfect Round and ripe Ohfor the golden round ringwhither doth it fly Let me run after itQuickHush and here Zarathustra stretched himself and felt that he wasasleep.Up said he to himself thou sleeper Thou noontide sleeper Wellthen up ye old legs It is time and more than time many a goodstretch of road is still awaiting youNow have ye slept your fill for how long a time A halfeternity Wellthen up now mine old heart For how long after such a sleep mayestthouremain awakeBut then did he fall asleep anew and his soul spake against him anddefended itself and lay down againLeave me alone Hush Hath notthe world just now become perfect Oh for the golden round ballGet up said Zarathustra thou little thief thou sluggard WhatStill stretching thyself yawning sighing falling into deep wellsWho art thou then O my soul and here he became frightened for asunbeam shot down from heaven upon his face.O heaven above me said he sighing and sat upright thou gazest atme Thou hearkenest unto my strange soulWhen wilt thou drink this drop of dew that fell down upon all earthlythingswhen wilt thou drink this strange soulWhen thou well of eternity thou joyous awful noontide abyss whenwilt thou drink my soul back into theeThus spake Zarathustra and rose from his couch beside the tree as ifawakening from a strange drunkenness and behold there stood thesun still exactly above his head. One might however rightly infertherefrom that Zarathustra had not then slept long.LXXI. THE GREETING.It was late in the afternoon only when Zarathustra after long uselesssearching and strolling about again came home to his cave. Whenhowever he stood over against it not more than twenty paces therefromthe thing happened which he now least of all expected he heard anew thegreat CRY OF DISTRESS. And extraordinary this time the cry came outof his own cave. It was a long manifold peculiar cry and Zarathustraplainly distinguished that it was composed of many voices althoughheard at a distance it might sound like the cry out of a single mouth.Thereupon Zarathustra rushed forward to his cave and behold what aspectacle awaited him after that concert For there did they all sittogether whom he had passed during the day the king on the right andthe king on the left the old magician the pope the voluntarybeggar the shadow the intellectually conscientious one the sorrowfulsoothsayer and the ass the ugliest man however had set a crown onhis head and had put round him two purple girdlesfor he liked likeall ugly ones to disguise himself and play the handsome person. In themidst however of that sorrowful company stood Zarathustras eagleruffled and disquieted for it had been called upon to answer too muchfor which its pride had not any answer the wise serpent however hunground its neck.All this did Zarathustra behold with great astonishment then however hescrutinised each individual guest with courteous curiosity read theirsouls and wondered anew. In the meantime the assembled ones had risenfrom their seats and waited with reverence for Zarathustra to speak.Zarathustra however spake thusYe despairing ones Ye strange ones So it was YOUR cry of distressthat I heard And now do I know also where he is to be sought whom Ihave sought for in vain today THE HIGHER MANIn mine own cave sitteth he the higher man But why do I wonder Havenot I myself allured him to me by honeyofferings and artful lurecallsof my happinessBut it seemeth to me that ye are badly adapted for company ye makeone anothers hearts fretful ye that cry for help when ye sit heretogether There is one that must first comeOne who will make you laugh once more a good jovial buffoon adancer a wind a wild romp some old foolwhat think yeForgive me however ye despairing ones for speaking such trivial wordsbefore you unworthy verily of such guests But ye do not divine WHATmaketh my heart wantonYe yourselves do it and your aspect forgive it me For every onebecometh courageous who beholdeth a despairing one. To encourage adespairing oneevery one thinketh himself strong enough to do so.To myself have ye given this powera good gift mine honourableguests An excellent guestspresent Well do not then upbraid when Ialso offer you something of mine.This is mine empire and my dominion that which is mine however shallthis evening and tonight be yours. Mine animals shall serve you let mycave be your restingplaceAt house and home with me shall no one despair in my purlieus do Iprotect every one from his wild beasts. And that is the first thingwhich I offer you securityThe second thing however is my little finger. And when ye have THATthen take the whole hand also yea and the heart with it Welcome herewelcome to you my guestsThus spake Zarathustra and laughed with love and mischief. After thisgreeting his guests bowed once more and were reverentially silent theking on the right however answered him in their name.O Zarathustra by the way in which thou hast given us thy hand and thygreeting we recognise thee as Zarathustra. Thou hast humbled thyselfbefore us almost hast thou hurt our reverenceWho however could have humbled himself as thou hast done with suchpride THAT uplifteth us ourselves a refreshment is it to our eyes andhearts.To behold this merely gladly would we ascend higher mountains thanthis. For as eager beholders have we come we wanted to see whatbrighteneth dim eyes.And lo now is it all over with our cries of distress. Now are our mindsand hearts open and enraptured. Little is lacking for our spirits tobecome wanton.There is nothing O Zarathustra that groweth more pleasingly on earththan a lofty strong will it is the finest growth. An entire landscaperefresheth itself at one such tree.To the pine do I compare him O Zarathustra which groweth up liketheetall silent hardy solitary of the best supplest woodstatelyIn the end however grasping out for ITS dominion with strong greenbranches asking weighty questions of the wind the storm and whateveris at home on high placesAnswering more weightily a commander a victor Oh who should notascend high mountains to behold such growthsAt thy tree O Zarathustra the gloomy and illconstituted also refreshthemselves at thy look even the wavering become steady and heal theirhearts.And verily towards thy mountain and thy tree do many eyes turn todaya great longing hath arisen and many have learned to ask Who isZarathustraAnd those into whose ears thou hast at any time dripped thy song and thyhoney all the hidden ones the lonedwellers and the twaindwellershave simultaneously said to their heartsDoth Zarathustra still live It is no longer worth while to liveeverything is indifferent everything is useless or elsewe must livewith ZarathustraWhy doth he not come who hath so long announced himself thus do manypeople ask hath solitude swallowed him up Or should we perhaps go tohimNow doth it come to pass that solitude itself becometh fragile andbreaketh open like a grave that breaketh open and can no longer holdits dead. Everywhere one seeth resurrected ones.Now do the waves rise and rise around thy mountain O Zarathustra. Andhowever high be thy height many of them must rise up to thee thy boatshall not rest much longer on dry ground.And that we despairing ones have now come into thy cave and already nolonger despairit is but a prognostic and a presage that better onesare on the way to theeFor they themselves are on the way to thee the last remnant ofGod among menthat is to say all the men of great longing of greatloathing of great satietyAll who do not want to live unless they learn again to HOPEunlessthey learn from thee O Zarathustra the GREAT hopeThus spake the king on the right and seized the hand of Zarathustra inorder to kiss it but Zarathustra checked his veneration and steppedback frightened fleeing as it were silently and suddenly into the fardistance. After a little while however he was again at home with hisguests looked at them with clear scrutinising eyes and saidMy guests ye higher men I will speak plain language and plainly withyou. It is not for YOU that I have waited here in these mountains.Plain language and plainly Good God said here the king on theleft to himself one seeth he doth not know the good Occidentals thissage out of the OrientBut he meaneth blunt language and bluntlywell That is not the worsttaste in these daysYe may verily all of you be higher men continued Zarathustra butfor meye are neither high enough nor strong enough.For me that is to say for the inexorable which is now silent in mebut will not always be silent. And if ye appertain to me still it isnot as my right arm.For he who himself standeth like you on sickly and tender legswisheth above all to be TREATED INDULGENTLY whether he be conscious ofit or hide it from himself.My arms and my legs however I do not treat indulgently I DO NOT TREATMY WARRIORS INDULGENTLY how then could ye be fit for MY warfareWith you I should spoil all my victories. And many of you would tumbleover if ye but heard the loud beating of my drums.Moreover ye are not sufficiently beautiful and wellborn for me. Irequire pure smooth mirrors for my doctrines on your surface even mineown likeness is distorted.On your shoulders presseth many a burden many a recollection many amischievous dwarf squatteth in your corners. There is concealed populacealso in you.And though ye be high and of a higher type much in you is crooked andmisshapen. There is no smith in the world that could hammer you rightand straight for me.Ye are only bridges may higher ones pass over upon you Ye signifysteps so do not upbraid him who ascendeth beyond you into HIS heightOut of your seed there may one day arise for me a genuine son andperfect heir but that time is distant. Ye yourselves are not those untowhom my heritage and name belong.Not for you do I wait here in these mountains not with you may Idescend for the last time. Ye have come unto me only as a presage thathigher ones are on the way to meNOT the men of great longing of great loathing of great satiety andthat which ye call the remnant of GodNay Nay Three times Nay For OTHERS do I wait here in thesemountains and will not lift my foot from thence without themFor higher ones stronger ones triumphanter ones merrier ones forsuch as are built squarely in body and soul LAUGHING LIONS must comeO my guests ye strange oneshave ye yet heard nothing of my childrenAnd that they are on the way to meDo speak unto me of my gardens of my Happy Isles of my new beautifulracewhy do ye not speak unto me thereofThis guestspresent do I solicit of your love that ye speak unto me ofmy children. For them am I rich for them I became poor what have I notsurrenderedWhat would I not surrender that I might have one thing THESEchildren THIS living plantation THESE lifetrees of my will and of myhighest hopeThus spake Zarathustra and stopped suddenly in his discourse for hislonging came over him and he closed his eyes and his mouth becauseof the agitation of his heart. And all his guests also were silent andstood still and confounded except only that the old soothsayer madesigns with his hands and his gestures.LXXII. THE SUPPER.For at this point the soothsayer interrupted the greeting of Zarathustraand his guests he pressed forward as one who had no time to loseseized Zarathustras hand and exclaimed But ZarathustraOne thing is more necessary than the other so sayest thou thyselfwell one thing is now more necessary UNTO ME than all others.A word at the right time didst thou not invite me to TABLE And hereare many who have made long journeys. Thou dost not mean to feed usmerely with discoursesBesides all of you have thought too much about freezing drowningsuffocating and other bodily dangers none of you however havethought of MY danger namely perishing of hungerThus spake the soothsayer. When Zarathustras animals however heardthese words they ran away in terror. For they saw that all theyhad brought home during the day would not be enough to fill the onesoothsayer.Likewise perishing of thirst continued the soothsayer. And althoughI hear water splashing here like words of wisdomthat is to sayplenteously and unweariedly Iwant WINENot every one is a born waterdrinker like Zarathustra. Neither dothwater suit weary and withered ones WE deserve wineIT alone givethimmediate vigour and improvised healthOn this occasion when the soothsayer was longing for wine it happenedthat the king on the left the silent one also found expression foronce. WE took care said he about wine I along with my brother theking on the right we have enough of winea whole assload of it. Sothere is nothing lacking but bread.Bread replied Zarathustra laughing when he spake it is preciselybread that anchorites have not. But man doth not live by bread alonebut also by the flesh of good lambs of which I have twoTHESE shall we slaughter quickly and cook spicily with sage it isso that I like them. And there is also no lack of roots and fruitsgood enough even for the fastidious and daintynor of nuts and otherriddles for cracking.Thus will we have a good repast in a little while. But whoever wish toeat with us must also give a hand to the work even the kings. For withZarathustra even a king may be a cook.This proposal appealed to the hearts of all of them save that thevoluntary beggar objected to the flesh and wine and spices.Just hear this glutton Zarathustra said he jokingly doth one gointo caves and high mountains to make such repastsNow indeed do I understand what he once taught us Blessed be moderatepoverty And why he wisheth to do away with beggars.Be of good cheer replied Zarathustra as I am. Abide by thycustoms thou excellent one grind thy corn drink thy water praise thycookingif only it make thee gladI am a law only for mine own I am not a law for all. He however whobelongeth unto me must be strong of bone and light of footJoyous in fight and feast no sulker no John o Dreams ready for thehardest task as for the feast healthy and hale.The best belongeth unto mine and me and if it be not given us then dowe take itthe best food the purest sky the strongest thoughts thefairest womenThus spake Zarathustra the king on the right however answered and saidStrange Did one ever hear such sensible things out of the mouth of awise manAnd verily it is the strangest thing in a wise man if over and abovehe be still sensible and not an ass.Thus spake the king on the right and wondered the ass however withillwill said YEA to his remark. This however was the beginning ofthat long repast which is called The Supper in the historybooks. Atthis there was nothing else spoken of but THE HIGHER MAN.LXXIII. THE HIGHER MAN..When I came unto men for the first time then did I commit the anchoritefolly the great folly I appeared on the marketplace.And when I spake unto all I spake unto none. In the evening howeverropedancers were my companions and corpses and I myself almost acorpse.With the new morning however there came unto me a new truth then didI learn to say Of what account to me are marketplace and populace andpopulacenoise and long populaceearsYe higher men learn THIS from me On the marketplace no one believethin higher men. But if ye will speak there very well The populacehowever blinketh We are all equal.Ye higher menso blinketh the populacethere are no higher men weare all equal man is man before Godwe are all equalBefore GodNow however this God hath died. Before the populacehowever we will not be equal. Ye higher men away from themarketplace.Before GodNow however this God hath died Ye higher men this God wasyour greatest danger.Only since he lay in the grave have ye again arisen. Now only cometh thegreat noontide now only doth the higher man becomemasterHave ye understood this word O my brethren Ye are frightened do yourhearts turn giddy Doth the abyss here yawn for you Doth the hellhoundhere yelp at youWell Take heart ye higher men Now only travaileth the mountain of thehuman future. God hath died now do WE desirethe Superman to live..The most careful ask today How is man to be maintained Zarathustrahowever asketh as the first and only one How is man to be SURPASSEDThe Superman I have at heart THAT is the first and only thing tomeand NOT man not the neighbour not the poorest not the sorriestnot the best.O my brethren what I can love in man is that he is an overgoing and adowngoing. And also in you there is much that maketh me love and hope.In that ye have despised ye higher men that maketh me hope. For thegreat despisers are the great reverers.In that ye have despaired there is much to honour. For ye have notlearned to submit yourselves ye have not learned petty policy.For today have the petty people become master they all preachsubmission and humility and policy and diligence and consideration andthe long et cetera of petty virtues.Whatever is of the effeminate type whatever originateth from theservile type and especially the populacemishmashTHAT wisheth now tobe master of all human destinyO disgust Disgust DisgustTHAT asketh and asketh and never tireth How is man to maintain himselfbest longest most pleasantly Therebyare they the masters oftoday.These masters of todaysurpass them O my brethrenthese pettypeople THEY are the Supermans greatest dangerSurpass ye higher men the petty virtues the petty policy thesandgrain considerateness the anthill trumpery the pitiablecomfortableness the happiness of the greatest numberAnd rather despair than submit yourselves. And verily I love youbecause ye know not today how to live ye higher men For thus do YElivebest.Have ye courage O my brethren Are ye stouthearted NOT the couragebefore witnesses but anchorite and eagle courage which not even a Godany longer beholdethCold souls mules the blind and the drunken I do not callstouthearted. He hath heart who knoweth fear but VANQUISHETH it whoseeth the abyss but with PRIDE.He who seeth the abyss but with eagles eyeshe who with eaglestalons GRASPETH the abyss he hath courage..Man is evilso said to me for consolation all the wisest ones. Ahif only it be still true today For the evil is mans best force.Man must become better and evilerso do I teach. The evilest isnecessary for the Supermans best.It may have been well for the preacher of the petty people to suffer andbe burdened by mens sin. I however rejoice in great sin as my greatCONSOLATION.Such things however are not said for long ears. Every word alsois not suited for every mouth. These are fine faraway things at themsheeps claws shall not grasp.Ye higher men think ye that I am here to put right what ye have putwrongOr that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for you sufferersOr show you restless miswandering misclimbing ones new and easierfootpathsNay Nay Three times Nay Always more always better ones of yourtype shall succumbfor ye shall always have it worse and harder. ThusonlyThus only groweth man aloft to the height where the lightning strikethand shattereth him high enough for the lightningTowards the few the long the remote go forth my soul and my seekingof what account to me are your many little short miseriesYe do not yet suffer enough for me For ye suffer from yourselves yehave not yet suffered FROM MAN. Ye would lie if ye spake otherwise Noneof you suffereth from what I have suffered..It is not enough for me that the lightning no longer doeth harm. I donot wish to conduct it away it shall learnto work for ME.My wisdom hath accumulated long like a cloud it becometh stiller anddarker. So doeth all wisdom which shall one day bear LIGHTNINGS.Unto these men of today will I not be LIGHT nor be called light.THEMwill I blind lightning of my wisdom put out their eyes.Do not will anything beyond your power there is a bad falseness inthose who will beyond their power.Especially when they will great things For they awaken distrust ingreat things these subtle falsecoiners and stageplayersUntil at last they are false towards themselves squinteyed whitedcankers glossed over with strong words parade virtues and brilliantfalse deeds.Take good care there ye higher men For nothing is more precious to meand rarer than honesty.Is this today not that of the populace The populace however knowethnot what is great and what is small what is straight and what ishonest it is innocently crooked it ever lieth..Have a good distrust today ye higher men ye enheartened ones Yeopenhearted ones And keep your reasons secret For this today is thatof the populace.What the populace once learned to believe without reasons who couldrefute it to them by means of reasonsAnd on the marketplace one convinceth with gestures. But reasons makethe populace distrustful.And when truth hath once triumphed there then ask yourselves with gooddistrust What strong error hath fought for itBe on your guard also against the learned They hate you because theyare unproductive They have cold withered eyes before which every birdis unplumed.Such persons vaunt about not lying but inability to lie is still farfrom being love to truth. Be on your guardFreedom from fever is still far from being knowledge Refrigeratedspirits I do not believe in. He who cannot lie doth not know what truthis..If ye would go up high then use your own legs Do not get yourselvesCARRIED aloft do not seat yourselves on other peoples backs and headsThou hast mounted however on horseback Thou now ridest briskly upto thy goal Well my friend But thy lame foot is also with thee onhorsebackWhen thou reachest thy goal when thou alightest from thy horseprecisely on thy HEIGHT thou higher manthen wilt thou stumble.Ye creating ones ye higher men One is only pregnant with ones ownchild.Do not let yourselves be imposed upon or put upon Who then is YOURneighbour Even if ye act for your neighbourye still do not createfor himUnlearn I pray you this for ye creating ones your very virtuewisheth you to have naught to do with for and on account of andbecause. Against these false little words shall ye stop your ears.For ones neighbour is the virtue only of the petty people there itis said like and like and hand washeth handthey have neither theright nor the power for YOUR selfseekingIn your selfseeking ye creating ones there is the foresight andforeseeing of the pregnant What no ones eye hath yet seen namely thefruitthis sheltereth and saveth and nourisheth your entire love.Where your entire love is namely with your child there is also yourentire virtue Your work your will is YOUR neighbour let no falsevalues impose upon you.Ye creating ones ye higher men Whoever hath to give birth is sickwhoever hath given birth however is unclean.Ask women one giveth birth not because it giveth pleasure. The painmaketh hens and poets cackle.Ye creating ones in you there is much uncleanliness. That is because yehave had to be mothers.A new child oh how much new filth hath also come into the world Goapart He who hath given birth shall wash his soul.Be not virtuous beyond your powers And seek nothing from yourselvesopposed to probabilityWalk in the footsteps in which your fathers virtue hath already walkedHow would ye rise high if your fathers will should not rise with youHe however who would be a firstling let him take care lest he alsobecome a lastling And where the vices of your fathers are there shouldye not set up as saintsHe whose fathers were inclined for women and for strong wine and fleshof wildboar swine what would it be if he demanded chastity of himselfA folly would it be Much verily doth it seem to me for such a one ifhe should be the husband of one or of two or of three women.And if he founded monasteries and inscribed over their portals Theway to holinessI should still say What good is it it is a newfollyHe hath founded for himself a penancehouse and refugehouse much goodmay it do But I do not believe in it.In solitude there groweth what any one bringeth into italso the brutein ones nature. Thus is solitude inadvisable unto many.Hath there ever been anything filthier on earth than the saints ofthe wilderness AROUND THEM was not only the devil loosebut also theswine..Shy ashamed awkward like the tiger whose spring hath failedthus yehigher men have I often seen you slink aside. A CAST which ye made hadfailed.But what doth it matter ye diceplayers Ye had not learned to play andmock as one must play and mock Do we not ever sit at a great table ofmocking and playingAnd if great things have been a failure with you have ye yourselvesthereforebeen a failure And if ye yourselves have been a failurehath man thereforebeen a failure If man however hath been afailure well then never mind.The higher its type always the seldomer doth a thing succeed. Ye highermen here have ye not allbeen failuresBe of good cheer what doth it matter How much is still possible Learnto laugh at yourselves as ye ought to laughWhat wonder even that ye have failed and only halfsucceeded yehalfshattered ones Doth notmans FUTURE strive and struggle in youMans furthest profoundest starhighest issues his prodigiouspowersdo not all these foam through one another in your vesselWhat wonder that many a vessel shattereth Learn to laugh at yourselvesas ye ought to laugh Ye higher men O how much is still possibleAnd verily how much hath already succeeded How rich is this earth insmall good perfect things in wellconstituted thingsSet around you small good perfect things ye higher men. Their goldenmaturity healeth the heart. The perfect teacheth one to hope..What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth Was it not theword of him who said Woe unto them that laugh nowDid he himself find no cause for laughter on the earth Then he soughtbadly. A child even findeth cause for it.Hedid not love sufficiently otherwise would he also have lovedus the laughing ones But he hated and hooted us wailing andteethgnashing did he promise us.Must one then curse immediately when one doth not love Thatseemethto me bad taste. Thus did he however this absolute one. He sprang fromthe populace.And he himself just did not love sufficiently otherwise would he haveraged less because people did not love him. All great love doth not SEEKloveit seeketh more.Go out of the way of all such absolute ones They are a poor sicklytype a populacetype they look at this life with illwill they havean evil eye for this earth.Go out of the way of all such absolute ones They have heavy feet andsultry heartsthey do not know how to dance. How could the earth belight to such ones.Tortuously do all good things come nigh to their goal. Like catsthey curve their backs they purr inwardly with their approachinghappinessall good things laugh.His step betrayeth whether a person already walketh on HIS OWN pathjust see me walk He however who cometh nigh to his goal danceth.And verily a statue have I not become not yet do I stand there stiffstupid and stony like a pillar I love fast racing.And though there be on earth fens and dense afflictions he who hathlight feet runneth even across the mud and danceth as upon wellsweptice.Lift up your hearts my brethren high higher And do not forget yourlegs Lift up also your legs ye good dancers and better still if yestand upon your heads.This crown of the laughter this rosegarland crown I myself have puton this crown I myself have consecrated my laughter. No one else have Ifound today potent enough for this.Zarathustra the dancer Zarathustra the light one who beckoneth withhis pinions one ready for flight beckoning unto all birds ready andprepared a blissfully lightspirited oneZarathustra the soothsayer Zarathustra the soothlaugher no impatientone no absolute one one who loveth leaps and sideleaps I myself haveput on this crown.Lift up your hearts my brethren high higher And do not forget yourlegs Lift up also your legs ye good dancers and better still if yestand upon your headsThere are also heavy animals in a state of happiness there areclubfooted ones from the beginning. Curiously do they exert themselveslike an elephant which endeavoureth to stand upon its head.Better however to be foolish with happiness than foolish withmisfortune better to dance awkwardly than walk lamely. So learn Ipray you my wisdom ye higher men even the worst thing hath two goodreverse sidesEven the worst thing hath good dancinglegs so learn I pray you yehigher men to put yourselves on your proper legsSo unlearn I pray you the sorrowsighing and all thepopulacesadness Oh how sad the buffoons of the populace seem to metoday This today however is that of the populace..Do like unto the wind when it rusheth forth from its mountaincavesunto its own piping will it dance the seas tremble and leap under itsfootsteps.That which giveth wings to asses that which milketh the lionessespraised be that good unruly spirit which cometh like a hurricane untoall the present and unto all the populaceWhich is hostile to thistleheads and puzzleheads and to allwithered leaves and weedspraised be this wild good free spirit ofthe storm which danceth upon fens and afflictions as upon meadowsWhich hateth the consumptive populacedogs and all the illconstitutedsullen broodpraised be this spirit of all free spirits the laughingstorm which bloweth dust into the eyes of all the melanopic andmelancholicYe higher men the worst thing in you is that ye have none of youlearned to dance as ye ought to danceto dance beyond yourselves Whatdoth it matter that ye have failedHow many things are still possible So LEARN to laugh beyond yourselvesLift up your hearts ye good dancers high higher And do not forgetthe good laughterThis crown of the laughter this rosegarland crown to you my brethrendo I cast this crown Laughing have I consecrated ye higher men LEARNI pray youto laughLXXIV. THE SONG OF MELANCHOLY..When Zarathustra spake these sayings he stood nigh to the entrance ofhis cave with the last words however he slipped away from his guestsand fled for a little while into the open air.O pure odours around me cried he O blessed stillness around me Butwhere are mine animals Hither hither mine eagle and my serpentTell me mine animals these higher men all of themdo they perhapsnot SMELL well O pure odours around me Now only do I know and feel howI love you mine animals.And Zarathustra said once more I love you mine animals The eaglehowever and the serpent pressed close to him when he spake thesewords and looked up to him. In this attitude were they all three silenttogether and sniffed and sipped the good air with one another. For theair here outside was better than with the higher men..Hardly however had Zarathustra left the cave when the old magician gotup looked cunningly about him and said He is goneAnd already ye higher menlet me tickle you with this complimentaryand flattering name as he himself doethalready doth mine evil spiritof deceit and magic attack me my melancholy devilWhich is an adversary to this Zarathustra from the very heart forgiveit for this Now doth it wish to conjure before you it hath just ITShour in vain do I struggle with this evil spirit.Unto all of you whatever honours ye like to assume in your nameswhether ye call yourselves the free spirits or the conscientiousor the penitents of the spirit or the unfettered or the greatlongersUnto all of you who like me suffer FROM THE GREAT LOATHING towhom the old God hath died and as yet no new God lieth in cradles andswaddling clothesunto all of you is mine evil spirit and magicdevilfavourable.I know you ye higher men I know himI know also this fiend whom Ilove in spite of me this Zarathustra he himself often seemeth to melike the beautiful mask of a saintLike a new strange mummery in which mine evil spirit the melancholydevil delightethI love Zarathustra so doth it often seem to me forthe sake of mine evil spirit.But already doth IT attack me and constrain me this spirit ofmelancholy this eveningtwilight devil and verily ye higher men ithath a longingOpen your eyesit hath a longing to come NAKED whether male orfemale I do not yet know but it cometh it constraineth me alas openyour witsThe day dieth out unto all things cometh now the evening also untothe best things hear now and see ye higher men what devilman orwomanthis spirit of eveningmelancholy isThus spake the old magician looked cunningly about him and then seizedhis harp.. In evenings limpid air What time the dews soothings Unto the earth downpour Invisibly and unheard For tender shoegear wear The soothing dews like all thats kindgentle Bethinkst thou then bethinkst thou burning heart How once thou thirstedest For heavens kindly teardrops and dews downdroppings All singed and weary thirstedest What time on yellow grasspathways Wicked occidental sunny glances Through sombre trees about thee sported Blindingly sunny glowglances gladlyhurting Of TRUTH the wooer Thouso taunted they Nay Merely poet A brute insidious plundering grovelling That aye must lie That wittingly wilfully aye must lie For booty lusting Motley masked Selfhidden shrouded Himself his booty HEof truth the wooer Nay Mere fool Mere poet Just motley speaking From mask of fool confusedly shouting Circumambling on fabricated wordbridges On motley rainbowarches Twixt the spurious heavenly And spurious earthly Round us roving round us soaring MERE FOOL MERE POET HEof truth the wooer Not still stiff smooth and cold Become an image A godlike statue Set up in front of temples As a Gods own doorguard Nay hostile to all such truthfulnessstatues In every desert homelier than at temples With cattish wantonness Through every window leaping Quickly into chances Every wild forest asniffing Greedilylongingly sniffing That thou in wild forests Mong the motleyspeckled fierce creatures Shouldest rove sinfulsound and finecoloured With longing lips smacking Blessedly mocking blessedly hellish blessedly bloodthirsty Robbing skulking lyingroving Or unto eagles like which fixedly Long adown the precipice look Adown THEIR precipice Oh how they whirl down now Thereunder therein To ever deeper profoundness whirling Then Sudden With aim aright With quivering flight On LAMBKINS pouncing Headlong down sorehungry For lambkins longing Fierce gainst all lambspirits Furiousfierce gainst all that look Sheeplike or lambeyed or crispwoolly Grey with lambsheep kindliness Even thus Eaglelike pantherlike Are the poets desires Are THINE OWN desires neath a thousand guises Thou fool Thou poet Thou who all mankind viewedst So God as sheep The God TO REND within mankind As the sheep in mankind And in rending LAUGHING THAT THAT is thine own blessedness Of a panther and eagleblessedness Of a poet and foolthe blessedness In evenings limpid air What time the moons sickle Green twixt the purpleglowings And jealous stealth forth Of day the foe With every step in secret The rosy garlandhammocks Downsickling till theyve sunken Down nightwards faded downsunken Thus had I sunken one day From mine own truthinsanity From mine own fervid daylongings Of day aweary sick of sunshine Sunk downwards evenwards shadowwards By one sole trueness All scorched and thirsty Bethinkst thou still bethinkst thou burning heart How then thou thirstedest THAT I SHOULD BANNED BE FROM ALL THE TRUENESS MERE FOOL MERE POETLXXV. SCIENCE.Thus sang the magician and all who were present went like birdsunawares into the net of his artful and melancholy voluptuousness.Only the spiritually conscientious one had not been caught he at oncesnatched the harp from the magician and called out Air Let in goodair Let in Zarathustra Thou makest this cave sultry and poisonousthou bad old magicianThou seducest thou false one thou subtle one to unknown desires anddeserts. And alas that such as thou should talk and make ado about theTRUTHAlas to all free spirits who are not on their guard against SUCHmagicians It is all over with their freedom thou teachest and temptestback into prisonsThou old melancholy devil out of thy lament soundeth a lurement thouresemblest those who with their praise of chastity secretly invite tovoluptuousnessThus spake the conscientious one the old magician however lookedabout him enjoying his triumph and on that account put up with theannoyance which the conscientious one caused him. Be still said hewith modest voice good songs want to reecho well after good songsone should be long silent.Thus do all those present the higher men. Thou however hast perhapsunderstood but little of my song In thee there is little of the magicspirit.Thou praisest me replied the conscientious one in that thouseparatest me from thyself very well But ye others what do I see Yestill sit there all of you with lusting eyesYe free spirits whither hath your freedom gone Ye almost seem to meto resemble those who have long looked at bad girls dancing naked yoursouls themselves danceIn you ye higher men there must be more of that which the magiciancalleth his evil spirit of magic and deceitwe must indeed bedifferent.And verily we spake and thought long enough together ere Zarathustracame home to his cave for me not to be unaware that we ARE different.We SEEK different things even here aloft ye and I. For I seek moreSECURITY on that account have I come to Zarathustra. For he is stillthe most steadfast tower and willToday when everything tottereth when all the earth quaketh. Yehowever when I see what eyes ye make it almost seemeth to me that yeseek MORE INSECURITYMore horror more danger more earthquake. Ye long it almost seemethso to meforgive my presumption ye higher menYe long for the worst and dangerousest life which frighteneth MEmostfor the life of wild beasts for forests caves steep mountainsand labyrinthine gorges.And it is not those who lead OUT OF danger that please you best butthose who lead you away from all paths the misleaders. But ifsuch longing in you be ACTUAL it seemeth to me nevertheless to beIMPOSSIBLE.For fearthat is mans original and fundamental feeling through feareverything is explained original sin and original virtue. Through fearthere grew also MY virtue that is to say Science.For fear of wild animalsthat hath been longest fostered inman inclusive of the animal which he concealeth and feareth inhimselfZarathustra calleth it the beast inside.Such prolonged ancient fear at last become subtle spiritual andintellectualat present me thinketh it is called SCIENCE.Thus spake the conscientious one but Zarathustra who had just comeback into his cave and had heard and divined the last discourse threw ahandful of roses to the conscientious one and laughed on account ofhis truths. Why he exclaimed what did I hear just now Verily itseemeth to me thou art a fool or else I myself am one and quietly andquickly will I put thy truth upside down.For FEARis an exception with us. Courage however and adventure anddelight in the uncertain in the unattemptedCOURAGE seemeth to me theentire primitive history of man.The wildest and most courageous animals hath he envied and robbed of alltheir virtues thus only did he becomeman.THIS courage at last become subtle spiritual and intellectual thishuman courage with eagles pinions and serpents wisdom THIS itseemeth to me is called at presentZARATHUSTRA cried all of them there assembled as if with one voiceand burst out at the same time into a great laughter there arosehowever from them as it were a heavy cloud. Even the magician laughedand said wisely Well It is gone mine evil spiritAnd did I not myself warn you against it when I said that it was adeceiver a lying and deceiving spiritEspecially when it showeth itself naked. But what can I do with regardto its tricks Have I created it and the worldWell Let us be good again and of good cheer And although Zarathustralooketh with evil eyejust see him he disliketh meEre night cometh will he again learn to love and laud me he cannotlive long without committing such follies.HEloveth his enemies this art knoweth he better than any one I haveseen. But he taketh revenge for iton his friendsThus spake the old magician and the higher men applauded him so thatZarathustra went round and mischievously and lovingly shook hands withhis friendslike one who hath to make amends and apologise to everyone for something. When however he had thereby come to the door of hiscave lo then had he again a longing for the good air outside and forhis animalsand wished to steal out.LXXVI. AMONG DAUGHTERS OF THE DESERT..Go not away said then the wanderer who called himself Zarathustrasshadow abide with usotherwise the old gloomy affliction might againfall upon us.Now hath that old magician given us of his worst for our good andlo the good pious pope there hath tears in his eyes and hath quiteembarked again upon the sea of melancholy.Those kings may well put on a good air before us still for that haveTHEY learned best of us all at present Had they however no one to seethem I wager that with them also the bad game would again commenceThe bad game of drifting clouds of damp melancholy of curtainedheavens of stolen suns of howling autumnwindsThe bad game of our howling and crying for help Abide with us OZarathustra Here there is much concealed misery that wisheth to speakmuch evening much cloud much damp airThou hast nourished us with strong food for men and powerful proverbsdo not let the weakly womanly spirits attack us anew at dessertThou alone makest the air around thee strong and clear Did I ever findanywhere on earth such good air as with thee in thy caveMany lands have I seen my nose hath learned to test and estimate manykinds of air but with thee do my nostrils taste their greatest delightUnless it beunless it be do forgive an old recollection Forgiveme an old afterdinner song which I once composed amongst daughters ofthe desertFor with them was there equally good clear Oriental air there was Ifurthest from cloudy damp melancholy OldEuropeThen did I love such Oriental maidens and other blue kingdoms of heavenover which hang no clouds and no thoughts.Ye would not believe how charmingly they sat there when they didnot dance profound but without thoughts like little secrets likeberibboned riddles like dessertnutsManyhued and foreign forsooth but without clouds riddles whichcan be guessed to please such maidens I then composed an afterdinnerpsalm.Thus spake the wanderer who called himself Zarathustras shadow andbefore any one answered him he had seized the harp of the old magiciancrossed his legs and looked calmly and sagely around himwith hisnostrils however he inhaled the air slowly and questioningly like onewho in new countries tasteth new foreign air. Afterward he began to singwith a kind of roaring..THE DESERTS GROW WOE HIM WHO DOTH THEM HIDE Ha Solemnly In effect solemnly A worthy beginning Afric manner solemnly Of a lion worthy Or perhaps of a virtuous howlmonkey But its naught to you Ye friendly damsels dearly loved At whose own feet to me The first occasion To a European under palmtrees A seat is now granted. Selah. Wonderful truly Here do I sit now The desert nigh and yet I am So far still from the desert Even in naught yet deserted That is Im swallowed down By this the smallest oasis It opened up just yawning Its loveliest mouth agape Most sweetodoured of all mouthlets Then fell I right in Right down right throughin mong you Ye friendly damsels dearly loved Selah. Hail hail to that whale fishlike If it thus for its guests convenience Made things niceye well know Surely my learned allusion Hail to its belly If it had eer A such loveliest oasisbelly As this is though however I doubt about it With this come I out of OldEurope That doubtth more eagerly than doth any Elderly married woman. May the Lord improve it Amen Here do I sit now In this the smallest oasis Like a date indeed Brown quite sweet goldsuppurating For rounded mouth of maiden longing But yet still more for youthful maidlike Icecold and snowwhite and incisory Front teeth and for such assuredly Pine the hearts all of ardent datefruits. Selah. To the therenamed southfruits now Similar alltoosimilar Do I lie here by little Flying insects Roundsniffled and roundplayed And also by yet littler Foolisher and peccabler Wishes and phantasies Environed by you Ye silent presentientest Maidenkittens Dudu and Suleika ROUNDSPHINXED that into one word I may crowd much feeling Forgive me O God All such speechsinning Sit I here the best of air sniffling Paradisal air truly Bright and buoyant air goldenmottled As goodly air as ever From lunar orb downfell Be it by hazard Or supervened it by arrogancy As the ancient poets relate it. But doubter Im now calling it In question with this do I come indeed Out of Europe That doubtth more eagerly than doth any Elderly married woman. May the Lord improve it Amen. This the finest air drinking With nostrils outswelled like goblets Lacking future lacking remembrances Thus do I sit here ye Friendly damsels dearly loved And look at the palmtree there How it to a dancegirl like Doth bow and bend and on its haunches bob One doth it too when one viewth it long To a dancegirl like who as it seemth to me Too long and dangerously persistent Always always just on SINGLE leg hath stood Then forgot she thereby as it seemth to me The OTHER leg For vainly I at least Did search for the amissing Fellowjewel Namely the other leg In the sanctified precincts Nigh her very dearest very tenderest Flapping and fluttering and flickering skirting. Yea if ye should ye beauteous friendly ones Quite take my word She hath alas LOST it Hu Hu Hu Hu Hu It is away For ever away The other leg Oh pity for that loveliest other leg Where may it now tarry allforsaken weeping The lonesomest leg In fear perhaps before a Furious yellow blond and curled Leonine monster Or perhaps even Gnawed away nibbled badly Most wretched woeful woeful nibbled badly Selah. Oh weep ye not Gentle spirits Weep ye not ye Datefruit spirits Milkbosoms Ye sweetwoodheart Purselets Weep ye no more Pallid Dudu Be a man Suleika Bold Bold Or else should there perhaps Something strengthening heartstrengthening Here most proper be Some inspiring text Some solemn exhortation Ha Up now honour Moral honour European honour Blow again continue Bellowsbox of virtue Ha Once more thy roaring Thy moral roaring As a virtuous lion Nigh the daughters of deserts roaring For virtues outhowl Ye very dearest maidens Is more than every European fervour European hothunger And now do I stand here As European I cant be different Gods help to me AmenTHE DESERTS GROW WOE HIM WHO DOTH THEM HIDELXXVII. THE AWAKENING..After the song of the wanderer and shadow the cave became all at oncefull of noise and laughter and since the assembled guests all spakesimultaneously and even the ass encouraged thereby no longerremained silent a little aversion and scorn for his visitors came overZarathustra although he rejoiced at their gladness. For it seemed tohim a sign of convalescence. So he slipped out into the open air andspake to his animals.Whither hath their distress now gone said he and already did hehimself feel relieved of his petty disgustwith me it seemeth thatthey have unlearned their cries of distressThough alas not yet their crying. And Zarathustra stopped hisears for just then did the YEA of the ass mix strangely with the noisyjubilation of those higher men.They are merry he began again and who knoweth perhaps at theirhosts expense and if they have learned of me to laugh still it is notMY laughter they have learned.But what matter about that They are old people they recover in theirown way they laugh in their own way mine ears have already enduredworse and have not become peevish.This day is a victory he already yieldeth he fleeth THE SPIRIT OFGRAVITY mine old archenemy How well this day is about to end whichbegan so badly and gloomilyAnd it is ABOUT TO end. Already cometh the evening over the searideth it hither the good rider How it bobbeth the blessed one thehomereturning one in its purple saddlesThe sky gazeth brightly thereon the world lieth deep. Oh all yestrange ones who have come to me it is already worth while to havelived with meThus spake Zarathustra. And again came the cries and laughter of thehigher men out of the cave then began he anewThey bite at it my bait taketh there departeth also from them theirenemy the spirit of gravity. Now do they learn to laugh at themselvesdo I hear rightlyMy virile food taketh effect my strong and savoury sayings and verilyI did not nourish them with flatulent vegetables But with warriorfoodwith conquerorfood new desires did I awaken.New hopes are in their arms and legs their hearts expand. They find newwords soon will their spirits breathe wantonness.Such food may sure enough not be proper for children nor even forlonging girls old and young. One persuadeth their bowels otherwise I amnot their physician and teacher.The DISGUST departeth from these higher men well that is my victory.In my domain they become assured all stupid shame fleeth away theyempty themselves.They empty their hearts good times return unto them they keep holidayand ruminatethey become THANKFUL.THAT do I take as the best sign they become thankful. Not long will itbe ere they devise festivals and put up memorials to their old joys.They are CONVALESCENTS Thus spake Zarathustra joyfully to his heartand gazed outward his animals however pressed up to him and honouredhis happiness and his silence..All on a sudden however Zarathustras ear was frightened for the cavewhich had hitherto been full of noise and laughter became all at oncestill as deathhis nose however smelt a sweetscented vapour andincenseodour as if from burning pinecones.What happeneth What are they about he asked himself and stole upto the entrance that he might be able unobserved to see his guests.But wonder upon wonder what was he then obliged to behold with his owneyesThey have all of them become PIOUS again they PRAY they aremadsaid he and was astonished beyond measure. And forsooth allthese higher men the two kings the pope out of service the evilmagician the voluntary beggar the wanderer and shadow the oldsoothsayer the spiritually conscientious one and the ugliest mantheyall lay on their knees like children and credulous old women andworshipped the ass. And just then began the ugliest man to gurgle andsnort as if something unutterable in him tried to find expressionwhen however he had actually found words behold it was a piousstrange litany in praise of the adored and censed ass. And the litanysounded thusAmen And glory and honour and wisdom and thanks and praise and strengthbe to our God from everlasting to everlastingThe ass however here brayed YEA.He carrieth our burdens he hath taken upon him the form of a servanthe is patient of heart and never saith Nay and he who loveth his Godchastiseth him.The ass however here brayed YEA.He speaketh not except that he ever saith Yea to the world whichhe created thus doth he extol his world. It is his artfulness thatspeaketh not thus is he rarely found wrong.The ass however here brayed YEA.Uncomely goeth he through the world. Grey is the favourite colour inwhich he wrappeth his virtue. Hath he spirit then doth he conceal itevery one however believeth in his long ears.The ass however here brayed YEA.What hidden wisdom it is to wear long ears and only to say Yea andnever Nay Hath he not created the world in his own image namely asstupid as possibleThe ass however here brayed YEA.Thou goest straight and crooked ways it concerneth thee little whatseemeth straight or crooked unto us men. Beyond good and evil is thydomain. It is thine innocence not to know what innocence is.The ass however here brayed YEA.Lo how thou spurnest none from thee neither beggars nor kings. Thousufferest little children to come unto thee and when the bad boys decoythee then sayest thou simply YEA.The ass however here brayed YEA.Thou lovest sheasses and fresh figs thou art no fooddespiser. Athistle tickleth thy heart when thou chancest to be hungry. There is thewisdom of a God therein.The ass however here brayed YEA.LXXVIII. THE ASSFESTIVAL..At this place in the litany however Zarathustra could no longercontrol himself he himself cried out YEA louder even than the assand sprang into the midst of his maddened guests. Whatever are youabout ye grownup children he exclaimed pulling up the praying onesfrom the ground. Alas if any one else except Zarathustra had seenyouEvery one would think you the worst blasphemers or the very foolishestold women with your new beliefAnd thou thyself thou old pope how is it in accordance with thee toadore an ass in such a manner as GodO Zarathustra answered the pope forgive me but in divine mattersI am more enlightened even than thou. And it is right that it should beso.Better to adore God so in this form than in no form at all Think overthis saying mine exalted friend thou wilt readily divine that in sucha saying there is wisdom.He who said God is a Spiritmade the greatest stride and slidehitherto made on earth towards unbelief such a dictum is not easilyamended again on earthMine old heart leapeth and boundeth because there is still somethingto adore on earth. Forgive it O Zarathustra to an old piouspontiffheartAnd thou said Zarathustra to the wanderer and shadow thou callestand thinkest thyself a free spirit And thou here practisest suchidolatry and hierolatryWorse verily doest thou here than with thy bad brown girls thou badnew believerIt is sad enough answered the wanderer and shadow thou art rightbut how can I help it The old God liveth again O Zarathustra thoumayst say what thou wilt.The ugliest man is to blame for it all he hath reawakened him. Andif he say that he once killed him with Gods DEATH is always just aprejudice.And thou said Zarathustra thou bad old magician what didst thoudo Who ought to believe any longer in thee in this free age when THOUbelievest in such divine donkeyismIt was a stupid thing that thou didst how couldst thou a shrewd mando such a stupid thingO Zarathustra answered the shrewd magician thou art right it was astupid thingit was also repugnant to me.And thou even said Zarathustra to the spiritually conscientiousone consider and put thy finger to thy nose Doth nothing go againstthy conscience here Is thy spirit not too cleanly for this praying andthe fumes of those devoteesThere is something therein said the spiritually conscientious oneand put his finger to his nose there is something in this spectaclewhich even doeth good to my conscience.Perhaps I dare not believe in God certain it is however that Godseemeth to me most worthy of belief in this form.God is said to be eternal according to the testimony of the most pioushe who hath so much time taketh his time. As slow and as stupid aspossible THEREBY can such a one nevertheless go very far.And he who hath too much spirit might well become infatuated withstupidity and folly. Think of thyself O ZarathustraThou thyselfverily even thou couldst well become an ass throughsuperabundance of wisdom.Doth not the true sage willingly walk on the crookedest paths Theevidence teacheth it O ZarathustraTHINE OWN evidenceAnd thou thyself finally said Zarathustra and turned towards theugliest man who still lay on the ground stretching up his arm to theass for he gave it wine to drink. Say thou nondescript what hastthou been aboutThou seemest to me transformed thine eyes glow the mantle of thesublime covereth thine ugliness WHAT didst thou doIs it then true what they say that thou hast again awakened him Andwhy Was he not for good reasons killed and made away withThou thyself seemest to me awakened what didst thou do why didst THOUturn round Why didst THOU get converted Speak thou nondescriptO Zarathustra answered the ugliest man thou art a rogueWhether HE yet liveth or again liveth or is thoroughly deadwhich ofus both knoweth that best I ask thee.One thing however do I knowfrom thyself did I learn it once OZarathustra he who wanteth to kill most thoroughly LAUGHETH.Not by wrath but by laughter doth one killthus spakest thou onceO Zarathustra thou hidden one thou destroyer without wrath thoudangerous saintthou art a rogue.Then however did it come to pass that Zarathustra astonished at suchmerely roguish answers jumped back to the door of his cave and turningtowards all his guests cried out with a strong voiceO ye wags all of you ye buffoons Why do ye dissemble and disguiseyourselves before meHow the hearts of all of you convulsed with delight and wickednessbecause ye had at last become again like little childrennamelypiousBecause ye at last did again as children donamely prayed foldedyour hands and said good GodBut now leave I pray you THIS nursery mine own cave where todayall childishness is carried on. Cool down here outside your hotchildwantonness and hearttumultTo be sure except ye become as little children ye shall not enter intoTHAT kingdom of heaven. And Zarathustra pointed aloft with his hands.But we do not at all want to enter into the kingdom of heaven we havebecome menSO WE WANT THE KINGDOM OF EARTH..And once more began Zarathustra to speak. O my new friends said heye strange ones ye higher men how well do ye now please meSince ye have again become joyful Ye have verily all blossomedforth it seemeth to me that for such flowers as you NEW FESTIVALS arerequired.A little valiant nonsense some divine service and assfestival someold joyful Zarathustra fool some blusterer to blow your souls bright.Forget not this night and this assfestival ye higher men THAT did yedevise when with me that do I take as a good omensuch things onlythe convalescents deviseAnd should ye celebrate it again this assfestival do it from love toyourselves do it also from love to me And in remembrance of meThus spake Zarathustra.LXXIX. THE DRUNKEN SONG..Meanwhile one after another had gone out into the open air and into thecool thoughtful night Zarathustra himself however led the ugliestman by the hand that he might show him his nightworld and the greatround moon and the silvery waterfalls near his cave. There they atlast stood still beside one another all of them old people but withcomforted brave hearts and astonished in themselves that it was sowell with them on earth the mystery of the night however came nigherand nigher to their hearts. And anew Zarathustra thought to himselfOh how well do they now please me these higher menbut he did notsay it aloud for he respected their happiness and their silence.Then however there happened that which in this astonishing long daywas most astonishing the ugliest man began once more and for the lasttime to gurgle and snort and when he had at length found expressionbehold there sprang a question plump and plain out of his mouth agood deep clear question which moved the hearts of all who listenedto him.My friends all of you said the ugliest man what think ye For thesake of this dayI am for the first time content to have lived mineentire life.And that I testify so much is still not enough for me. It is worth whileliving on the earth one day one festival with Zarathustra hath taughtme to love the earth.Was THATlife will I say unto death. Well Once moreMy friends what think ye Will ye not like me say unto death WasTHATlife For the sake of Zarathustra well Once moreThus spake the ugliest man it was not however far from midnight.And what took place then think ye As soon as the higher men heard hisquestion they became all at once conscious of their transformation andconvalescence and of him who was the cause thereof then did they rushup to Zarathustra thanking honouring caressing him and kissing hishands each in his own peculiar way so that some laughed and some wept.The old soothsayer however danced with delight and though he wasthen as some narrators suppose full of sweet wine he was certainlystill fuller of sweet life and had renounced all weariness. There areeven those who narrate that the ass then danced for not in vain had theugliest man previously given it wine to drink. That may be the case orit may be otherwise and if in truth the ass did not dance that eveningthere nevertheless happened then greater and rarer wonders thanthe dancing of an ass would have been. In short as the proverb ofZarathustra saith What doth it matter.When however this took place with the ugliest man Zarathustra stoodthere like one drunken his glance dulled his tongue faltered and hisfeet staggered. And who could divine what thoughts then passed throughZarathustras soul Apparently however his spirit retreated and fledin advance and was in remote distances and as it were wandering onhigh mountainridges as it standeth written twixt two seasWandering twixt the past and the future as a heavy cloud. Graduallyhowever while the higher men held him in their arms he came back tohimself a little and resisted with his hands the crowd of the honouringand caring ones but he did not speak. All at once however he turnedhis head quickly for he seemed to hear something then laid he hisfinger on his mouth and said COMEAnd immediately it became still and mysterious round about fromthe depth however there came up slowly the sound of a clockbell.Zarathustra listened thereto like the higher men then however laidhe his finger on his mouth the second time and said again COME COMEIT IS GETTING ON TO MIDNIGHTand his voice had changed. But stillhe had not moved from the spot. Then it became yet stiller and moremysterious and everything hearkened even the ass and Zarathustrasnoble animals the eagle and the serpentlikewise the cave ofZarathustra and the big cool moon and the night itself. Zarathustrahowever laid his hand upon his mouth for the third time and saidCOME COME COME LET US NOW WANDER IT IS THE HOUR LET US WANDER INTOTHE NIGHT.Ye higher men it is getting on to midnight then will I say somethinginto your ears as that old clockbell saith it into mine earAs mysteriously as frightfully and as cordially as that midnightclockbell speaketh it to me which hath experienced more than one manWhich hath already counted the smarting throbbings of your fathersheartsah ah how it sigheth how it laugheth in its dream the olddeep deep midnightHush Hush Then is there many a thing heard which may not be heardby day now however in the cool air when even all the tumult of yourhearts hath become stillNow doth it speak now is it heard now doth it steal intooverwakeful nocturnal souls ah ah how the midnight sigheth how itlaugheth in its dreamHearest thou not how it mysteriously frightfully and cordiallyspeaketh unto THEE the old deep deep midnightO MAN TAKE HEED.Woe to me Whither hath time gone Have I not sunk into deep wells Theworld sleepethAh Ah The dog howleth the moon shineth. Rather will I die ratherwill I die than say unto you what my midnightheart now thinketh.Already have I died. It is all over. Spider why spinnest thou aroundme Wilt thou have blood Ah Ah The dew falleth the hour comethThe hour in which I frost and freeze which asketh and asketh andasketh Who hath sufficient courage for itWho is to be master of the world Who is going to say THUS shall yeflow ye great and small streamsThe hour approacheth O man thou higher man take heed this talk isfor fine ears for thine earsWHAT SAITH DEEP MIDNIGHTS VOICE INDEED.It carrieth me away my soul danceth. Dayswork Dayswork Who is tobe master of the worldThe moon is cool the wind is still. Ah Ah Have ye already flown highenough Ye have danced a leg nevertheless is not a wing.Ye good dancers now is all delight over wine hath become lees everycup hath become brittle the sepulchres mutter.Ye have not flown high enough now do the sepulchres mutter Free thedead Why is it so long night Doth not the moon make us drunkenYe higher men free the sepulchres awaken the corpses Ah why doth theworm still burrow There approacheth there approacheth the hourThere boometh the clockbell there thrilleth still the heart thereburroweth still the woodworm the heartworm. Ah Ah THE WORLD ISDEEP.Sweet lyre Sweet lyre I love thy tone thy drunken ranunculinetonehow long how far hath come unto me thy tone from the distancefrom the ponds of loveThou old clockbell thou sweet lyre Every pain hath torn thy heartfatherpain fatherspain forefatherspain thy speech hath becomeripeRipe like the golden autumn and the afternoon like mine anchoriteheartnow sayest thou The world itself hath become ripe the grapeturneth brownNow doth it wish to die to die of happiness. Ye higher men do ye notfeel it There welleth up mysteriously an odourA perfume and odour of eternity a rosyblessed browngoldwineodour of old happinessOf drunken midnightdeath happiness which singeth the world is deepAND DEEPER THAN THE DAY COULD READ.Leave me alone Leave me alone I am too pure for thee. Touch me notHath not my world just now become perfectMy skin is too pure for thy hands. Leave me alone thou dull doltishstupid day Is not the midnight brighterThe purest are to be masters of the world the least known thestrongest the midnightsouls who are brighter and deeper than any day.O day thou gropest for me Thou feelest for my happiness For thee am Irich lonesome a treasurepit a gold chamberO world thou wantest ME Am I worldly for thee Am I spiritual forthee Am I divine for thee But day and world ye are too coarseHave cleverer hands grasp after deeper happiness after deeperunhappiness grasp after some God grasp not after meMine unhappiness my happiness is deep thou strange day but yet am Ino God no Godshell DEEP IS ITS WOE..Gods woe is deeper thou strange world Grasp at Gods woe not at meWhat am I A drunken sweet lyreA midnightlyre a bellfrog which no one understandeth but whichMUST speak before deaf ones ye higher men For ye do not understand meGone Gone O youth O noontide O afternoon Now have come evening andnight and midnightthe dog howleth the windIs the wind not a dog It whineth it barketh it howleth. Ah Ahhow she sigheth how she laugheth how she wheezeth and panteth themidnightHow she just now speaketh soberly this drunken poetess hath sheperhaps overdrunk her drunkenness hath she become overawake doth sheruminateHer woe doth she ruminate over in a dream the old deepmidnightand still more her joy. For joy although woe be deep JOY ISDEEPER STILL THAN GRIEF CAN BE..Thou grapevine Why dost thou praise me Have I not cut thee I amcruel thou bleedest what meaneth thy praise of my drunken crueltyWhatever hath become perfect everything maturewanteth to die sosayest thou. Blessed blessed be the vintners knife But everythingimmature wanteth to live alasWoe saith Hence Go Away thou woe But everything that sufferethwanteth to live that it may become mature and lively and longingLonging for the further the higher the brighter. I want heirs so saith everything that suffereth I want children I do not wantMYSELFJoy however doth not want heirs it doth not want childrenjoywanteth itself it wanteth eternity it wanteth recurrence it wantetheverything eternallylikeitself.Woe saith Break bleed thou heart Wander thou leg Thou wing flyOnward upward thou pain Well Cheer up O mine old heart WOE SAITHHENCE GO.Ye higher men what think ye Am I a soothsayer Or a dreamer Or adrunkard Or a dreamreader Or a midnightbellOr a drop of dew Or a fume and fragrance of eternity Hear ye it notSmell ye it not Just now hath my world become perfect midnight is alsomiddayPain is also a joy curse is also a blessing night is also a sungoaway or ye will learn that a sage is also a fool.Said ye ever Yea to one joy O my friends then said ye Yea also untoALL woe. All things are enlinked enlaced and enamouredWanted ye ever once to come twice said ye ever Thou pleasest mehappiness Instant Moment then wanted ye ALL to come back againAll anew all eternal all enlinked enlaced and enamoured Oh thendid ye LOVE the worldYe eternal ones ye love it eternally and for all time and also untowoe do ye say Hence Go but come back FOR JOYS ALL WANTETERNITY.All joy wanteth the eternity of all things it wanteth honey itwanteth lees it wanteth drunken midnight it wanteth graves it wantethgravetears consolation it wanteth gilded eveningredWHAT doth not joy want it is thirstier heartier hungrier morefrightful more mysterious than all woe it wanteth ITSELF it bitethinto ITSELF the rings will writheth in itIt wanteth love it wanteth hate it is overrich it bestoweth itthroweth away it beggeth for some one to take from it it thanketh thetaker it would fain be hatedSo rich is joy that it thirsteth for woe for hell for hate forshame for the lame for the WORLDfor this world Oh ye know itindeedYe higher men for you doth it long this joy this irrepressibleblessed joyfor your woe ye failures For failures longeth alleternal joy.For joys all want themselves therefore do they also want grief Ohappiness O pain Oh break thou heart Ye higher men do learn itthat joys want eternity.Joys want the eternity of ALL things they WANT DEEP PROFOUNDETERNITY.Have ye now learned my song Have ye divined what it would say WellCheer up Ye higher men sing now my roundelaySing now yourselves the song the name of which is Once more thesignification of which is Unto all eternitysing ye higher menZarathustras roundelay O man Take heed What saith deep midnights voice indeed I slept my sleep From deepest dream Ive woke and plead The world is deep And deeper than the day could read. Deep is its woe Joydeeper still than grief can be Woe saith Hence Go But joys all want eternity Want deep profound eternityLXXX. THE SIGN.In the morning however after this night Zarathustra jumped up fromhis couch and having girded his loins he came out of his cave glowingand strong like a morning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.Thou great star spake he as he had spoken once before thou deepeye of happiness what would be all thy happiness if thou hadst notTHOSE for whom thou shinestAnd if they remained in their chambers whilst thou art already awakeand comest and bestowest and distributest how would thy proud modestyupbraid for itWell they still sleep these higher men whilst I am awake THEY arenot my proper companions Not for them do I wait here in my mountains.At my work I want to be at my day but they understand not what are thesigns of my morning my stepis not for them the awakeningcall.They still sleep in my cave their dream still drinketh at my drunkensongs. The audient ear for MEthe OBEDIENT ear is yet lacking in theirlimbs.This had Zarathustra spoken to his heart when the sun arose thenlooked he inquiringly aloft for he heard above him the sharp call ofhis eagle. Well called he upwards thus is it pleasing and proper tome. Mine animals are awake for I am awake.Mine eagle is awake and like me honoureth the sun. With eagletalonsdoth it grasp at the new light. Ye are my proper animals I love you.But still do I lack my proper menThus spake Zarathustra then however it happened that all on a suddenhe became aware that he was flocked around and fluttered around as ifby innumerable birdsthe whizzing of so many wings however and thecrowding around his head was so great that he shut his eyes. And verilythere came down upon him as it were a cloud like a cloud of arrowswhich poureth upon a new enemy. But behold here it was a cloud of loveand showered upon a new friend.What happeneth unto me thought Zarathustra in his astonished heartand slowly seated himself on the big stone which lay close to the exitfrom his cave. But while he grasped about with his hands around himabove him and below him and repelled the tender birds behold therethen happened to him something still stranger for he grasped therebyunawares into a mass of thick warm shaggy hair at the same timehowever there sounded before him a roara long soft lionroar.THE SIGN COMETH said Zarathustra and a change came over his heart.And in truth when it turned clear before him there lay a yellowpowerful animal at his feet resting its head on his kneeunwilling toleave him out of love and doing like a dog which again findeth its oldmaster. The doves however were no less eager with their love than thelion and whenever a dove whisked over its nose the lion shook its headand wondered and laughed.When all this went on Zarathustra spake only a word MY CHILDREN ARENIGH MY CHILDREN then he became quite mute. His heart howeverwas loosed and from his eyes there dropped down tears and fell uponhis hands. And he took no further notice of anything but sat theremotionless without repelling the animals further. Then flew the dovesto and fro and perched on his shoulder and caressed his white hairand did not tire of their tenderness and joyousness. The strong lionhowever licked always the tears that fell on Zarathustras hands androared and growled shyly. Thus did these animals do.All this went on for a long time or a short time for properlyspeaking there is NO time on earth for such things. Meanwhilehowever the higher men had awakened in Zarathustras cave andmarshalled themselves for a procession to go to meet Zarathustra andgive him their morning greeting for they had found when they awakenedthat he no longer tarried with them. When however they reached thedoor of the cave and the noise of their steps had preceded them thelion started violently it turned away all at once from Zarathustra androaring wildly sprang towards the cave. The higher men however whenthey heard the lion roaring cried all aloud as with one voice fledback and vanished in an instant.Zarathustra himself however stunned and strange rose from his seatlooked around him stood there astonished inquired of his heartbethought himself and remained alone. What did I hear said he atlast slowly what happened unto me just nowBut soon there came to him his recollection and he took in at a glanceall that had taken place between yesterday and today. Here is indeedthe stone said he and stroked his beard on IT sat I yestermornand here came the soothsayer unto me and here heard I first the crywhich I heard just now the great cry of distress.O ye higher men YOUR distress was it that the old soothsayer foretoldto me yestermornUnto your distress did he want to seduce and tempt me OZarathustra said he to me I come to seduce thee to thy last sin.To my last sin cried Zarathustra and laughed angrily at his ownwords WHAT hath been reserved for me as my last sinAnd once more Zarathustra became absorbed in himself and sat downagain on the big stone and meditated. Suddenly he sprang upFELLOWSUFFERING FELLOWSUFFERING WITH THE HIGHER MEN he cried outand his countenance changed into brass. Well THAThath had its timeMy suffering and my fellowsufferingwhat matter about them Do I thenstrive after HAPPINESS I strive after my WORKWell The lion hath come my children are nigh Zarathustra hath grownripe mine hour hath comeThis is MY morning MY day beginneth ARISE NOW ARISE THOU GREATNOONTIDEThus spake Zarathustra and left his cave glowing and strong like amorning sun coming out of gloomy mountains.APPENDIX.NOTES ON THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA BY ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.I have had some opportunities of studying the conditions under whichNietzsche is read in Germany France and England and I have foundthat in each of these countries students of his philosophy as ifactuated by precisely similar motives and desires and misled by thesame mistaken tactics on the part of most publishers all proceed in thesame happygolucky style when taking him up. They have had it said tothem that he wrote without any system and they very naturally concludethat it does not matter in the least whether they begin with his firstthird or last book provided they can obtain a few vague ideas as towhat his leading and most sensational principles were.Now it is clear that the book with the most mysterious startling orsuggestive title will always stand the best chance of being purchasedby those who have no other criteria to guide them in their choicethan the aspect of a titlepage and this explains why Thus SpakeZarathustra is almost always the first and often the only one ofNietzsches books that falls into the hands of the uninitiated.The title suggests all kinds of mysteries a glance at thechapterheadings quickly confirms the suspicions already arousedand the subtitle A Book for All and None generally succeeds indissipating the last doubts the prospective purchaser may entertainconcerning his fitness for the book or its fitness for him. And whathappensThus Spake Zarathustra is taken home the reader who perchance mayknow no more concerning Nietzsche than a magazine article has told himtries to read it and understanding less than half he reads probablynever gets further than the second or third partand then only to feelconvinced that Nietzsche himself was rather hazy as to what he wastalking about. Such chapters as The Child with the Mirror In theHappy Isles The GraveSong Immaculate Perception The StillestHour The Seven Seals and many others are almost utterly devoid ofmeaning to all those who do not know something of Nietzsches life hisaims and his friendships.As a matter of fact Thus Spake Zarathustra though it isunquestionably Nietzsches opus magnum is by no means the first ofNietzsches works that the beginner ought to undertake to read. Theauthor himself refers to it as the deepest work ever offered to theGerman public and elsewhere speaks of his other writings as beingnecessary for the understanding of it. But when it is remembered thatin Zarathustra we not only have the history of his most intimateexperiences friendships feuds disappointments triumphs and the likebut that the very form in which they are narrated is one which tendsrather to obscure than to throw light upon them the difficulties whichmeet the reader who starts quite unprepared will be seen to be reallyformidable.Zarathustra thenthis shadowy allegorical personality speaking inallegories and parables and at times not even refraining from relatinghis own dreamsis a figure we can understand but very imperfectly if wehave no knowledge of his creator and counterpart Friedrich Nietzscheand it were therefore well previous to our study of the more abstruseparts of this book if we were to turn to some authoritative book onNietzsches life and works and to read all that is there said on thesubject. Those who can read German will find an excellent guide in thisrespect in Frau FoersterNietzsches exhaustive and highly interestingbiography of her brother Das Leben Friedrich Nietzsches publishedby Naumann while the works of Deussen Raoul Richter and BaronessIsabelle von UngerSternberg will be found to throw useful andnecessary light upon many questions which it would be difficult for asister to touch upon.In regard to the actual philosophical views expounded in this workthere is an excellent way of clearing up any difficulties they maypresent and that is by an appeal to Nietzsches other works. Again andagain of course he will be found to express himself so clearly thatall reference to his other writings may be dispensed with but wherethis is not the case the advice he himself gives is after all the bestto be followed here viz.to regard such works as Joyful ScienceBeyond Good and Evil The Genealogy of Morals The Twilight ofthe Idols The Antichrist The Will to Power etc. etc. as thenecessary preparation for Thus Spake Zarathustra.These directions though they are by no means simple to carry out seemat least to possess the quality of definiteness and straightforwardness.Follow them and all will be clear I seem to imply. But I regret tosay that this is not really the case. For my experience tells me thateven after the above directions have been followed with the greatestpossible zeal the student will still halt in perplexity before certainpassages in the book before us and wonder what they mean. Now it iswith the view of giving a little additional help to all those who findthemselves in this position that I proceed to put forth my own personalinterpretation of the more abstruse passages in this work.In offering this little commentary to the Nietzsche student I shouldlike it to be understood that I make no claim as to its infallibility orindispensability. It represents but an attempt on my parta very feebleone perhapsto give the reader what little help I can in surmountingdifficulties which a long study of Nietzsches life and works hasenabled me partially I hope to overcome. ...Perhaps it would be as well to start out with a broad and rapid sketchof Nietzsche as a writer on Morals Evolution and Sociology so thatthe reader may be prepared to pick out for himself so to speak allpassages in this work bearing in any way upon Nietzsches views in thosethree important branches of knowledge.A. Nietzsche and Morality.In morality Nietzsche starts out by adopting the position of therelativist. He says there are no absolute values good and evilthese are mere means adopted by all in order to acquire power tomaintain their place in the world or to become supreme. It is thelions good to devour an antelope. It is the deadleaf butterflysgood to tell a foe a falsehood. For when the deadleaf butterfly is indanger it clings to the side of a twig and what it says to its foe ispractically this I am not a butterfly I am a dead leaf and can beof no use to thee. This is a lie which is good to the butterfly forit preserves it. In nature every species of organic being instinctivelyadopts and practises those acts which most conduce to the prevalenceor supremacy of its kind. Once the most favourable order of conduct isfound proved efficient and established it becomes the ruling moralityof the species that adopts it and bears them along to victory. Allspecies must not and cannot value alike for what is the lions good isthe antelopes evil and vice versa.Concepts of good and evil are therefore in their origin merely a meansto an end they are expedients for acquiring power.Applying this principle to mankind Nietzsche attacked Christianmoral values. He declared them to be like all other morals merelyan expedient for protecting a certain type of man. In the case ofChristianity this type was according to Nietzsche a low one.Conflicting moral codes have been no more than the conflicting weaponsof different classes of men for in mankind there is a continual warbetween the powerful the noble the strong and the wellconstitutedon the one side and the impotent the mean the weak and theillconstituted on the other. The war is a war of moral principles.The morality of the powerful class Nietzsche calls NOBLE orMASTERMORALITY that of the weak and subordinate class he callsSLAVEMORALITY. In the first morality it is the eagle which lookingdown upon a browsing lamb contends that eating lamb is good. In thesecond the slavemorality it is the lamb which looking up from thesward bleats dissentingly Eating lamb is evil.B. The Master and SlaveMorality Compared.The first morality is active creative Dionysian. The second ispassive defensiveto it belongs the struggle for existence.Where attempts have not been made to reconcile the two moralities theymay be described as followsAll is GOOD in the noble morality whichproceeds from strength power health wellconstitutedness happinessand awfulness for the motive force behind the people practising it isthe struggle for power. The antithesis good and bad to thisfirst class means the same as noble and despicable. Bad in themastermorality must be applied to the coward to all acts that springfrom weakness to the man with an eye to the main chance who wouldforsake everything in order to live.With the second the slavemorality the case is different. Thereinasmuch as the community is an oppressed suffering unemancipated andweary one all THAT will be held to be good which alleviates thestate of suffering. Pity the obliging hand the warm heart patienceindustry and humilitythese are unquestionably the qualities we shallhere find flooded with the light of approval and admiration becausethey are the most USEFUL qualities they make life endurable they areof assistance in the struggle for existence which is the motive forcebehind the people practising this morality. To this class all that isAWFUL is bad in fact it is THE evil par excellence. Strength healthsuperabundance of animal spirits and power are regarded with hatesuspicion and fear by the subordinate class.Now Nietzsche believed that the first or the noblemorality conduced toan ascent in the line of life because it was creative and active. Onthe other hand he believed that the second or slavemorality whereit became paramount led to degeneration because it was passive anddefensive wanting merely to keep those who practised it alive. Hencehis earnest advocacy of noblemorality.C. Nietzsche and Evolution.Nietzsche as an evolutionist I shall have occasion to define and discussin the course of these notes see Notes on Chapter LVI. par. and onChapter LVII.. For the present let it suffice for us to know that heaccepted the Development Hypothesis as an explanation of the origin ofspecies but he did not halt where most naturalists have halted. Heby no means regarded man as the highest possible being which evolutioncould arrive at for though his physical development may have reachedits limit this is not the case with his mental or spiritual attributes.If the process be a fact if things have BECOME what they are then hecontends we may describe no limit to mans aspirations. If he struggledup from barbarism and still more remotely from the lower Primateshis ideal should be to surpass man himself and reach Superman seeespecially the Prologue.D. Nietzsche and Sociology.Nietzsche as a sociologist aims at an aristocratic arrangement ofsociety. He would have us rear an ideal race. Honest and truthful inintellectual matters he could not even think that men are equal. Withthese preachers of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded. Forthus speaketh justice unto ME Men are not equal. He sees preciselyin this inequality a purpose to be served a condition to be exploited.Every elevation of the type man he writes in Beyond Good andEvil has hitherto been the work of an aristocratic societyand sowill it always bea society believing in a long scale of gradations ofrank and differences of worth among human beings.Those who are sufficiently interested to desire to read his own detailedaccount of the society he would fain establish will find an excellentpassage in Aphorism of The Antichrist. ...PART I. THE PROLOGUE.In Part I. including the Prologue no very great difficulties willappear. Zarathustras habit of designating a whole class of men or awhole school of thought by a single fitting nickname may perhaps lead toa little confusion at first but as a rule when the general driftof his arguments is grasped it requires but a slight effort of theimagination to discover whom he is referring to. In the ninth paragraphof the Prologue for instance it is quite obvious that Herdsmen inthe verse Herdsmen I say etc. etc. stands for all those todaywho are the advocates of gregariousnessof the anthill. And when ourauthor says A robber shall Zarathustra be called by the herdsmen itis clear that these words may be taken almost literally from one whoseideal was the rearing of a higher aristocracy. Again the good andjust throughout the book is the expression used in referring to theselfrighteous of modern timesthose who are quite sure that theyknow all that is to be known concerning good and evil and are satisfiedthat the values their little world of tradition has handed down to themare destined to rule mankind as long as it lasts.In the last paragraph of the Prologue verse Zarathustra gives us aforetaste of his teaching concerning the big and the little sagacitiesexpounded subsequently. He says he would he were as wise as his serpentthis desire will be found explained in the discourse entitled TheDespisers of the Body which I shall have occasion to refer to later. ...THE DISCOURSES.Chapter I. The Three Metamorphoses.This opening discourse is a parable in which Zarathustra discloses themental development of all creators of new values. It is the story ofa life which reaches its consummation in attaining to a secondingenuousness or in returning to childhood. Nietzsche the supposedanarchist here plainly disclaims all relationship whatever to anarchyfor he shows us that only by bearing the burdens of the existing law andsubmitting to it patiently as the camel submits to being laden doesthe free spirit acquire that ascendancy over tradition which enables himto meet and master the dragon Thou shaltthe dragon with the valuesof a thousand years glittering on its scales. There are two lessons inthis discourse first that in order to create one must be as a littlechild secondly that it is only through existing law and order thatone attains to that height from which new law and new order may bepromulgated.Chapter II. The Academic Chairs of Virtue.Almost the whole of this is quite comprehensible. It is a discourseagainst all those who confound virtue with tameness and smug ease andwho regard as virtuous only that which promotes security and tends todeepen sleep.Chapter IV. The Despisers of the Body.Here Zarathustra gives names to the intellect and the instincts hecalls the one the little sagacity and the latter the big sagacity. Schopenhauers teaching concerning the intellect is fully endorsed here.An instrument of thy body is also thy little sagacity my brotherwhich thou callest spirit says Zarathustra. From beginning to end itis a warning to those who would think too lightly of the instinctsand unduly exalt the intellect and its derivatives Reason andUnderstanding.Chapter IX. The Preachers of Death.This is an analysis of the psychology of all those who have the evileye and are pessimists by virtue of their constitutions.Chapter XV. The Thousand and One Goals.In this discourse Zarathustra opens his exposition of the doctrine ofrelativity in morality and declares all morality to be a mere meansto power. Needless to say that verses and refer to theGreeks the Persians the Jews and the Germans respectively. In thepenultimate verse he makes known his discovery concerning the root ofmodern Nihilism and indifferencei.e. that modern man has no goal noaim no ideals see Note A.Chapter XVIII. Old and Young Women.Nietzsches views on women have either to be loved at first sightor they become perhaps the greatest obstacle in the way of those whootherwise would be inclined to accept his philosophy. Women especiallyof course have been taught to dislike them because it has beenrumoured that his views are unfriendly to themselves. Now to my mindall this is pure misunderstanding and error.German philosophers thanks to Schopenhauer have earned rather a badname for their views on women. It is almost impossible for one of themto write a line on the subject however kindly he may do so withoutbeing suspected of wishing to open a crusade against the fair sex.Despite the fact therefore that all Nietzsches views in this respectwere dictated to him by the profoundest love despite Zarathustrasreservation in this discourse that with women nothing that can besaid is impossible and in the face of other overwhelming evidenceto the contrary Nietzsche is universally reported to have mis sonpied dans le plat where the female sex is concerned. And what is thefundamental doctrine which has given rise to so much bitterness andaversionMerely this that the sexes are at bottom ANTAGONISTICthatis to say as different as blue is from yellow and that the bestpossible means of rearing anything approaching a desirable race is topreserve and to foster this profound hostility. What Nietzsche strivesto combat and to overthrow is the modern democratic tendency which isslowly labouring to level all thingseven the sexes. His quarrel is notwith womenwhat indeed could be more undignifiedit is with those whowould destroy the natural relationship between the sexes by modifyingeither the one or the other with a view to making them more alike. Thehuman world is just as dependent upon womens powers as upon mens. Itis womens strongest and most valuable instincts which help to determinewho are to be the fathers of the next generation. By destroying theseparticular instincts that is to say by attempting to masculinise womanand to feminise men we jeopardise the future of our people. The generaldemocratic movement of modern times in its frantic struggle to mitigateall differences is now invading even the world of sex. It is againstthis movement that Nietzsche raises his voice he would have womanbecome ever more woman and man become ever more man. Only thus andhe is undoubtedly right can their combined instincts lead to theexcellence of humanity. Regarded in this light all his views on womanappear not only necessary but just see Note on Chapter LVI. par. .It is interesting to observe that the last line of the discourse whichhas so frequently been used by women as a weapon against Nietzschesviews concerning them was suggested to Nietzsche by a woman see DasLeben F. Nietzsches.Chapter XXI. Voluntary Death.In regard to this discourse I should only like to point out thatNietzsche had a particular aversion to the word suicideselfmurder.He disliked the evil it suggested and in rechristening the actVoluntary Death i.e. the death that comes from no other hand thanones own he was desirous of elevating it to the position it held inclassical antiquity see Aphorism in The Twilight of the Idols.Chapter XXII. The Bestowing Virtue.An important aspect of Nietzsches philosophy is brought to light inthis discourse. His teaching as is well known places the Aristotelianman of spirit above all others in the natural divisions of man. Theman with overflowing strength both of mind and body who must dischargethis strength or perish is the Nietzschean ideal. To such a man givingfrom his overflow becomes a necessity bestowing develops into a meansof existence and this is the only giving the only charity thatNietzsche recognises. In paragraph of the discourse we readZarathustras healthy exhortation to his disciples to become independentthinkers and to find themselves before they learn any more from him seeNotes on Chapters LVI. par. and LXXIII. pars. . ...PART II.Chapter XXIII. The Child with the Mirror.Nietzsche tells us here in a poetical form how deeply grieved he wasby the manifold misinterpretations and misunderstandings which werebecoming rife concerning his publications. He does not recognisehimself in the mirror of public opinion and recoils terrified from thedistorted reflection of his features. In verse he gives us ahint which it were well not to pass over too lightly for in theintroduction to The Genealogy of Morals written in he finds itnecessary to refer to the matter again and with greater precision. Thepoint is this that a creator of new values meets with his surest andstrongest obstacles in the very spirit of the language which is at hisdisposal. Words like all other manifestations of an evolving race arestamped with the values that have long been paramount in that race.Now the original thinker who finds himself compelled to use the currentspeech of his country in order to impart new and hitherto untried viewsto his fellows imposes a task upon the natural means of communicationwhich it is totally unfitted to performhence the obscurities andprolixities which are so frequently met with in the writings of originalthinkers. In the Dawn of Day Nietzsche actually cautions youngwriters against THE DANGER OF ALLOWING THEIR THOUGHTS TO BE MOULDED BYTHE WORDS AT THEIR DISPOSAL.Chapter XXIV. In the Happy Isles.While writing this Nietzsche is supposed to have been thinking of theisland of Ischia which was ultimately destroyed by an earthquake. Histeaching here is quite clear. He was among the first thinkers of Europeto overcome the pessimism which godlessness generally brings in itswake. He points to creating as the surest salvation from the sufferingwhich is a concomitant of all higher life. What would there be tocreate he asks if there wereGods His ideal the Superman lendshim the cheerfulness necessary to the overcoming of that despair usuallyattendant upon godlessness and upon the apparent aimlessness of a worldwithout a god.Chapter XXIX. The Tarantulas.The tarantulas are the Socialists and Democrats. This discourse offersus an analysis of their mental attitude. Nietzsche refuses to beconfounded with those resentful and revengeful ones who condemn societyFROM BELOW and whose criticism is only suppressed envy. There arethose who preach my doctrine of life he says of the NietzscheanSocialists and are at the same time preachers of equality andtarantulas see Notes on Chapter XL. and Chapter LI..Chapter XXX. The Famous Wise Ones.This refers to all those philosophers hitherto who have run in theharness of established values and have not risked their reputation withthe people in pursuit of truth. The philosopher however as Nietzscheunderstood him is a man who creates new values and thus leads mankindin a new direction.Chapter XXXIII. The GraveSong.Here Zarathustra sings about the ideals and friendships of his youth.Verses to undoubtedly refer to Richard Wagner see Note on ChapterLXV..Chapter XXXIV. SelfSurpassing.In this discourse we get the best exposition in the whole book ofNietzsches doctrine of the Will to Power. I go into this questionthoroughly in the Note on Chapter LVII.Nietzsche was not an iconoclast from choice. Those who hastily class himwith the anarchists or the Progressivists of the last century failto understand the high esteem in which he always held both law anddiscipline. In verse of this most decisive discourse he trulyexplains his position when he says ...he who hath to be a creator ingood and evilverily he hath first to be a destroyer and break valuesin pieces. This teaching in regard to selfcontrol is evidence enoughof his reverence for law.Chapter XXXV. The Sublime Ones.These belong to a type which Nietzsche did not altogether dislike butwhich he would fain have rendered more subtle and plastic. It is thetype that takes life and itself too seriously that never surmounts thecamelstage mentioned in the first discourse and that is obduratelysublime and earnest. To be able to smile while speaking of lofty thingsand NOT TO BE OPPRESSED by them is the secret of real greatness. Hewhose hand trembles when it lays hold of a beautiful thing has thequality of reverence without the artists unembarrassed friendshipwith the beautiful. Hence the mistakes which have arisen in regard toconfounding Nietzsche with his extreme opposites the anarchists andagitators. For what they dare to touch and break with the impudenceand irreverence of the unappreciative he seems likewise to touch andbreakbut with other fingerswith the fingers of the loving andunembarrassed artist who is on good terms with the beautiful and whofeels able to create it and to enhance it with his touch. The questionof taste plays an important part in Nietzsches philosophy and verses of this discourse exactly state Nietzsches ultimate views on thesubject. In the Spirit of Gravity he actually criesNeither a goodnor a bad taste but MY taste of which I have no longer either shame orsecrecy.Chapter XXXVI. The Land of Culture.This is a poetical epitome of some of the scathing criticism ofscholars which appears in the first of the Thoughts out of Seasonthepolemical pamphlet written in against David Strauss and hisschool. He reproaches his former colleagues with being sterile andshows them that their sterility is the result of their not believingin anything. He who had to create had always his presaging dreams andastral premonitionsand believed in believing See Note on ChapterLXXVII. In the last two verses he reveals the nature of his altruism.How far it differs from that of Christianity we have already read in thediscourse NeighbourLove but here he tells us definitely the natureof his love to mankind he explains why he was compelled to assail theChristian values of pity and excessive love of the neighbour not onlybecause they are slavevalues and therefore tend to promote degenerationsee Note B. but because he could only love his childrens land theundiscovered land in a remote sea because he would fain retrieve theerrors of his fathers in his children.Chapter XXXVII. Immaculate Perception.An important feature of Nietzsches interpretation of Life is disclosedin this discourse. As Buckle suggests in his Influence of Women on theProgress of Knowledge the scientific spirit of the investigator isboth helped and supplemented by the latters emotions and personalityand the divorce of all emotionalism and individual temperament fromscience is a fatal step towards sterility. Zarathustra abjures all thosewho would fain turn an IMPERSONAL eye upon nature and contemplate herphenomena with that pure objectivity to which the scientific idealistsof today would so much like to attain. He accuses such idealists ofhypocrisy and guile he says they lack innocence in their desires andtherefore slander all desiring.Chapter XXXVIII. Scholars.This is a record of Nietzsches final breach with his formercolleaguesthe scholars of Germany. Already after the publication ofthe Birth of Tragedy numbers of German philologists and professionalphilosophers had denounced him as one who had strayed too far fromtheir flock and his lectures at the University of Bale were desertedin consequence but it was not until when he finally severed allconnection with University work that he may be said to have attained tothe freedom and independence which stamp this discourse.Chapter XXXIX. Poets.People have sometimes said that Nietzsche had no sense of humour. Ihave no intention of defending him here against such foolish critics Ishould only like to point out to the reader that we have him here athis best poking fun at himself and at his fellowpoets see Note onChapter LXIII. pars. .Chapter XL. Great Events.Here we seem to have a puzzle. Zarathustra himself while relatinghis experience with the firedog to his disciples fails to get theminterested in his narrative and we also may be only too ready to turnover these pages under the impression that they are little more thana mere phantasy or poetical flight. Zarathustras interview with thefiredog is however of great importance. In it we find Nietzscheface to face with the creature he most sincerely loathesthe spiritof revolution and we obtain fresh hints concerning his hatred of theanarchist and rebel. Freedom ye all roar most eagerly he says tothe firedog but I have unlearned the belief in Great Events whenthere is much roaring and smoke about them. Not around the inventorsof new noise but around the inventors of new values doth the worldrevolve INAUDIBLY it revolveth.Chapter XLI. The Soothsayer.This refers of course to Schopenhauer. Nietzsche as is well knownwas at one time an ardent follower of Schopenhauer. He overcamePessimism by discovering an object in existence he saw the possibilityof raising society to a higher level and preached the profoundestOptimism in consequence.Chapter XLII. Redemption.Zarathustra here addresses cripples. He tells them of othercripplesthe GREAT MEN in this world who have one organ or facultyinordinately developed at the cost of their other faculties. This isdoubtless a reference to a fact which is too often noticeable in thecase of so many of the worlds giants in art science or religion. Inverse we are told what Nietzsche called Redemptionthat is to saythe ability to say of all that is past Thus would I have it. Thein ability to say this and the resentment which results therefromhe regards as the source of all our feelings of revenge and all ourdesires to punishpunishment meaning to him merely a euphemism for theword revenge invented in order to still our consciences. He who can beproud of his enemies who can be grateful to them for the obstacles theyhave put in his way he who can regard his worst calamity as but theextra strain on the bow of his life which is to send the arrow ofhis longing even further than he could have hopedthis man knows norevenge neither does he know despair he truly has found redemption andcan turn on the worst in his life and even in himself and call it hisbest see Notes on Chapter LVII..Chapter XLIII. Manly Prudence.This discourse is very important. In Beyond Good and Evil we hearoften enough that the select and superior man must wear a mask andhere we find this injunction explained. And he who would not languishamongst men must learn to drink out of all glasses and he who wouldkeep clean amongst men must know how to wash himself even with dirtywater. This I venture to suggest requires some explanation. At a timewhen individuality is supposed to be shown most tellingly by puttingboots on ones hands and gloves on ones feet it is somewhat refreshingto come across a true individualist who feels the chasm between himselfand others so deeply that he must perforce adapt himself to themoutwardly at least in all respects so that the inner differenceshould be overlooked. Nietzsche practically tells us here that it is nothe who intentionally wears eccentric clothes or does eccentric thingswho is truly the individualist. The profound man who is by naturedifferentiated from his fellows feels this difference too keenly tocall attention to it by any outward show. He is shamefast and bashfulwith those who surround him and wishes not to be discovered by themjust as one instinctively avoids all lavish display of comfort or wealthin the presence of a poor friend.Chapter XLIV. The Stillest Hour.This seems to me to give an account of the great struggle which musthave taken place in Nietzsches soul before he finally resolved to makeknown the more esoteric portions of his teaching. Our deepest feelingscrave silence. There is a certain selfrespect in the serious man whichmakes him hold his profoundest feelings sacred. Before they are utteredthey are full of the modesty of a virgin and often the oldest sage willblush like a girl when this virginity is violated by an indiscretionwhich forces him to reveal his deepest thoughts. ...PART III.This is perhaps the most important of all the four parts. If itcontained only The Vision and the Enigma and The Old and New Tables I should still be of this opinion for in the former of these discourseswe meet with what Nietzsche regarded as the crowning doctrine of hisphilosophy and in The Old and New Tables we have a valuable epitome ofpractically all his leading principles.Chapter XLVI. The Vision and the Enigma.The Vision and the Enigma is perhaps an example of Nietzsche in hismost obscure vein. We must know how persistently he inveighed againstthe oppressing and depressing influence of mans sense of guilt andconsciousness of sin in order fully to grasp the significance of thisdiscourse. Slowly but surely he thought the values of Christianity andJudaic traditions had done their work in the minds of men. What wereonce but expedients devised for the discipline of a certain portion ofhumanity had now passed into mans blood and had become instincts. Thisoppressive and paralysing sense of guilt and of sin is what Nietzscherefers to when he speaks of the spirit of gravity. This creaturehalfdwarf halfmole whom he bears with him a certain distance on hisclimb and finally defies and whom he calls his devil and archenemy isnothing more than the heavy millstone guilty conscience together withthe concept of sin which at present hangs round the neck of men. To riseabove itto soaris the most difficult of all things today. Nietzscheis able to think cheerfully and optimistically of the possibility oflife in this world recurring again and again when he has once cast thedwarf from his shoulders and he announces his doctrine of the EternalRecurrence of all things great and small to his archenemy and indefiance of him.That there is much to be said for Nietzsches hypothesis of the EternalRecurrence of all things great and small nobody who has read theliterature on the subject will doubt for an instant but it remains avery daring conjecture notwithstanding and even in its ultimate effectas a dogma on the minds of men I venture to doubt whether Nietzscheever properly estimated its worth see Note on Chapter LVII..What follows is clear enough. Zarathustra sees a young shepherdstruggling on the ground with a snake holding fast to the back of histhroat. The sage assuming that the snake must have crawled into theyoung mans mouth while he lay sleeping runs to his help and pullsat the loathsome reptile with all his might but in vain. At last indespair Zarathustra appeals to the young mans will. Knowing full wellwhat a ghastly operation he is recommending he nevertheless criesBite Bite Its head off Bite as the only possible solution of thedifficulty. The young shepherd bites and far away he spits thesnakes head whereupon he rises No longer shepherd no longer manatransfigured being a lightsurrounded being that LAUGHED Never onearth laughed a man as he laughedIn this parable the young shepherd is obviously the man of today thesnake that chokes him represents the stultifying and paralysing socialvalues that threaten to shatter humanity and the advice Bite Bite is but Nietzsches exasperated cry to mankind to alter their valuesbefore it is too late.Chapter XLVII. Involuntary Bliss.This like The Wanderer is one of the many introspective passagesin the work and is full of innuendos and hints as to the Nietzscheanoutlook on life.Chapter XLVIII. Before Sunrise.Here we have a record of Zarathustras avowal of optimism as also theimportant statement concerning Chance or Accident verse . Thosewho are familiar with Nietzsches philosophy will not require to be toldwhat an important role his doctrine of chance plays in his teaching.The Giant Chance has hitherto played with the puppet manthis isthe fact he cannot contemplate with equanimity. Man shall now exploitchance he says again and again and make it fall on its knees beforehim See verse in On the OliveMount and verses in TheBedwarfing Virtue.Chapter XLIX. The Bedwarfing Virtue.This requires scarcely any comment. It is a satire on modern man andhis belittling virtues. In verses and of the second part of thediscourse we are reminded of Nietzsches powerful indictment of thegreat of today in the Antichrist Aphorism At presentnobody has any longer the courage for separate rights for rights ofdomination for a feeling of reverence for himself and his equalsFORPATHOS OF DISTANCE.... Our politics are MORBID from this want ofcourageThe aristocracy of character has been undermined most craftilyby the lie of the equality of souls and if the belief in the privilegeof the many makes revolutions and WILL CONTINUE TO MAKE them it isChristianity let us not doubt it it is CHRISTIAN valuations whichtranslate every revolution merely into blood and crime see alsoBeyond Good and Evil pages . Nietzsche thought it was abad sign of the times that even rulers have lost the courage oftheir positions and that a man of Frederick the Greats power anddistinguished gifts should have been able to say Ich bin der ersteDiener des Staates I am the first servant of the State. To thisutterance of the great sovereign verse undoubtedly refers.Cowardice and Mediocrity are the names with which he labels modernnotions of virtue and moderation.In Part III. we get the sentiments of the discourse In the HappyIsles but perhaps in stronger terms. Once again we find Nietzschethoroughly at ease if not cheerful as an atheist and speaking withvertiginous daring of making chance go on its knees to him. In verse Zarathustra makes yet another attempt at defining his entirelyantianarchical attitude and unless such passages have been completelyoverlooked or deliberately ignored hitherto by those who will persist inlaying anarchy at his door it is impossible to understand how he everbecame associated with that foul political party.The last verse introduces the expression THE GREAT NOONTIDE In thepoem to be found at the end of Beyond Good and Evil we meet withthe expression again and we shall find it occurring time and again inNietzsches works. It will be found fully elucidated in the fifth partof The Twilight of the Idols but for those who cannot refer tothis book it were well to point out that Nietzsche called the presentperiodour periodthe noon of mans history. Dawn is behind us. Thechildhood of mankind is over. Now we KNOW there is now no longer anyexcuse for mistakes which will tend to botch and disfigure the type man.With respect to what is past he says I have like all discerningones great toleration that is to say GENEROUS selfcontrol.... But myfeeling changes suddenly and breaks out as soon as I enter the modernperiod OUR period. Our age KNOWS... See Note on Chapter LXX..Chapter LI. On Passingby.Here we find Nietzsche confronted with his extreme opposite withhim therefore for whom he is most frequently mistaken by the unwary.Zarathustras ape he is called in the discourse. He is one of thoseat whose hands Nietzsche had to suffer most during his lifetime andat whose hands his philosophy has suffered most since his death. In thisrespect it may seem a little trivial to speak of extremes meeting butit is wonderfully apt. Many have adopted Nietzsches mannerisms andwordcoinages who had nothing in common with him beyond the ideas andbusiness they plagiarised but the superficial observer and a largeportion of the public not knowing of these thingsnot knowing perhapsthat there are iconoclasts who destroy out of love and are thereforecreators and that there are others who destroy out of resentment andrevengefulness and who are therefore revolutionists and anarchistsareprone to confound the two to the detriment of the nobler type.If we now read what the fool says to Zarathustra and note the tricks ofspeech he has borrowed from him if we carefully follow the attitudehe assumes we shall understand why Zarathustra finally interrupts him.Stop this at once Zarathustra cries long have thy speech andthy species disgusted me.... Out of love alone shall my contempt and mywarning bird take wing BUT NOT OUT OF THE SWAMP It were well ifthis discourse were taken to heart by all those who are too ready toassociate Nietzsche with lesser and noiser menwith mountebanks andmummers.Chapter LII. The Apostates.It is clear that this applies to all those breathless and hasty tastersof everything who plunge too rashly into the sea of independentthought and heresy and who having miscalculated their strength findit impossible to keep their head above water. A little older a littlecolder says Nietzsche. They soon clamber back to the conventions ofthe age they intended reforming. The French then say le diable se faithermite but these men as a rule have never been devils neitherdo they become angels for in order to be really good or evil somestrength and deep breathing is required. Those who are more interestedin supporting orthodoxy than in being over nice concerning the kind ofsupport they give it often refer to these people as evidence in favourof the true faith.Chapter LIII. The Return Home.This is an example of a class of writing which may be passed over toolightly by those whom poetasters have made distrustful of poetry. Fromfirst to last it is extremely valuable as an autobiographical note. Theinevitable superficiality of the rabble is contrasted with the peacefuland profound depths of the anchorite. Here we first get a direct hintconcerning Nietzsches fundamental passionthe main force behind allhis new values and scathing criticism of existing values. In verse we are told that pity was his greatest danger. The broad altruism of thelawgiver thinking over vast eras of time was continually being pittedby Nietzsche in himself against that transient and meaner sympathy forthe neighbour which he more perhaps than any of his contemporaries hadsuffered from but which he was certain involved enormous dangers notonly for himself but also to the next and subsequent generations seeNote B. where pity is mentioned among the degenerate virtues. Laterin the book we shall see how his profound compassion leads him intotemptation and how frantically he struggles against it. In verses and he tells us to what extent he had to modify himself in orderto be endured by his fellows whom he loved see also verse in ManlyPrudence. Nietzsches great love for his fellows which he confessesin the Prologue and which is at the root of all his teaching seemsrather to elude the discerning powers of the average philanthropist andmodern man. He cannot see the wood for the trees. A philanthropy thatsacrifices the minority of the presentday for the majority constitutingposterity completely evades his mental grasp and Nietzschesphilosophy because it declares Christian values to be a danger to thefuture of our kind is therefore shelved as brutal cold and hard seeNote on Chapter XXXVI.. Nietzsche tried to be all things to all menhe was sufficiently fond of his fellows for that in the Return Home hedescribes how he ultimately returns to loneliness in order to recoverfrom the effects of his experiment.Chapter LIV. The Three Evil Things.Nietzsche is here completely in his element. Three things hithertobest cursed and most calumniated on earth are brought forward to beweighed. Voluptuousness thirst of power and selfishnessthe threeforces in humanity which Christianity has done most to garble andbesmirchNietzsche endeavours to reinstate in their former places ofhonour. Voluptuousness or sensual pleasure is a dangerous thing todiscuss nowadays. If we mention it with favour we may be regardedhowever unjustly as the advocate of savages satyrs and puresensuality. If we condemn it we either go over to the Puritans or wejoin those who are wont to come to table with no edge to their appetitesand who therefore grumble at all good fare. There can be no doubt thatthe value of healthy innocent voluptuousness like the value of healthitself must have been greatly discounted by all those who resentingtheir inability to partake of this worlds goods cried like St PaulI would that all men were even as I myself. Now Nietzsches philosophymight be called an attempt at giving back to healthy and normal meninnocence and a clean conscience in their desiresNOT to applaud thevulgar sensualists who respond to every stimulus and whose passions areout of hand not to tell the mean selfish individual whose selfishnessis a pollution see Aphorism Twilight of the Idols that he isright nor to assure the weak the sick and the crippled that thethirst of power which they gratify by exploiting the happier andhealthier individuals is justifiedbut to save the clean healthy manfrom the values of those around him who look at everything through themud that is in their own bodiesto give him and him alone a cleanconscience in his manhood and the desires of his manhood. Do I counselyou to slay your instincts I counsel to innocence in your instincts. In verse of the second paragraph as in verse I of paragraph inThe Old and New Tables Nietzsche gives us a reason for his occasionalobscurity see also verses to of Poets. As I have already pointedout his philosophy is quite esoteric. It can serve no purpose with theordinary mediocre type of man. I personally can no longer have anydoubt that Nietzsches only object in that part of his philosophy wherehe bids his friends stand Beyond Good and Evil with him was to savehigher men whose growth and scope might be limited by the toostrict observance of modern values from foundering on the rocks of aCompromise between their own genius and traditional conventions. Theonly possible way in which the great man can achieve greatness isby means of exceptional freedomthe freedom which assists him inexperiencing HIMSELF. Verses to afford an excellent supplement toNietzsches description of the attitude of the noble type towards theslaves in Aphorism of the work Beyond Good and Evil see also NoteB.Chapter LV. The Spirit of Gravity.See Note on Chapter XLVI. In Part II. of this discourse we meet witha doctrine not touched upon hitherto save indirectlyI refer to thedoctrine of selflove. We should try to understand this perfectly beforeproceeding for it is precisely views of this sort which after havingbeen cut out of the original context are repeated far and wide asinternal evidence proving the general unsoundness of Nietzschesphilosophy. Already in the last of the Thoughts out of Season Nietzsche speaks as follows about modern men ...these modern creatureswish rather to be hunted down wounded and torn to shreds than tolive alone with themselves in solitary calm. Alone with oneselfthisthought terrifies the modern soul it is his one anxiety his oneghastly fear English Edition page . In his feverish scurry tofind entertainment and diversion whether in a novel a newspaper or aplay the modern man condemns his own age utterly for he shows that inhis heart of hearts he despises himself. One cannot change a conditionof this sort in a day to become endurable to oneself an innertransformation is necessary. Too long have we lost ourselves in ourfriends and entertainments to be able to find ourselves so soon atanothers bidding. And verily it is no commandment for today andtomorrow to LEARN to love oneself. Rather is it of all arts the finestsubtlest last and patientest.In the last verse Nietzsche challenges us to show that our way isthe right way. In his teaching he does not coerce us nor does heoverpersuade he simply says I am a law only for mine own I am not alaw for all. Thisis now MY waywhere is yoursChapter LVI. Old and New Tables. Par. .Nietzsche himself declares this to be the most decisive portion ofthe whole of Thus Spake Zarathustra. It is a sort of epitome of hisleading doctrines. In verse of the second paragraph we learn how hehimself would fain have abandoned the poetical method of expression hadhe not known only too well that the only chance a new doctrine has ofsurviving nowadays depends upon its being given to the world in somekind of artform. Just as prophets centuries ago often had to haverecourse to the mask of madness in order to mitigate the hatred of thosewho did not and could not see as they did so today the struggle forexistence among opinions and values is so great that an artformis practically the only garb in which a new philosophy can dare tointroduce itself to us.Pars. and .Many of the paragraphs will be found to be merely reminiscent of formerdiscourses. For instance par. recalls Redemption. The last verseof par. is important. Freedom which as I have pointed out beforeNietzsche considered a dangerous acquisition in inexperienced orunworthy hands here receives its deathblow as a general desideratum.In the first Part we read under The Way of the Creating One thatfreedom as an end in itself does not concern Zarathustra at all. He saysthere Free from what What doth that matter to Zarathustra Clearlyhowever shall thine eye answer me free FOR WHAT And in TheBedwarfing Virtue Ah that ye understood my word Do ever what yewillbut first be such as CAN WILL.Par. .Here we have a description of the kind of altruism Nietzsche exactedfrom higher men. It is really a comment upon The Bestowing Virtue seeNote on Chapter XXII..Par. .This refers of course to the reception pioneers of Nietzsches stampmeet with at the hands of their contemporaries.Par. .Nietzsche teaches that nothing is stablenot even valuesnoteven the concepts good and evil. He likens life unto a stream. Butfootbridges and railings span the stream and they seem to standfirm. Many will be reminded of good and evil when they look upon thesestructures for thus these same values stand over the stream of lifeand life flows on beneath them and leaves them standing. When howeverwinter comes and the stream gets frozen many inquire Should noteverythingSTAND STILL Fundamentally everything standeth still. Butsoon the spring cometh and with it the thawwind. It breaks the ice andthe ice breaks down the footbridges and railings whereupon everythingis swept away. This state of affairs according to Nietzsche has nowbeen reached. Oh my brethren is not everything AT PRESENT IN FLUXHave not all railings and footbridges fallen into the water Who wouldstill HOLD ON to good and evilPar. .This is complementary to the first three verses of par. .Par. .So far this is perhaps the most important paragraph. It is a protestagainst reading a moral order of things in life. Life is somethingessentially immoral Nietzsche tells us in the introduction to theBirth of Tragedy. Even to call life activity or to define itfurther as the continuous adjustment of internal relations to externalrelations as Spencer has it Nietzsche characterises as a democraticidiosyncracy. He says to define it in this way is to mistake thetrue nature and function of life which is Will to Power.... Life isESSENTIALLY appropriation injury conquest of the strange and weaksuppression severity obtrusion of its own forms incorporation andat least putting it mildest exploitation. Adaptation is merely asecondary activity a mere reactivity see Note on Chapter LVII..Pars. .These deal with Nietzsches principle of the desirability of rearing aselect race. The biological and historical grounds for his insistenceupon this principle are of course manifold. Gobineau in his greatwork LInegalite des Races Humaines lays strong emphasis upon theevils which arise from promiscuous and intersocial marriages. He alonewould suffice to carry Nietzsches point against all those who areopposed to the other conditions to the conditions which would havesaved Rome which have maintained the strength of the Jewish race andwhich are strictly maintained by every breeder of animals throughout theworld. Darwin in his remarks relative to the degeneration of CULTIVATEDtypes of animals through the action of promiscuous breeding bringsGobineau support from the realm of biology.The last two verses of par. were discussed in the Notes on ChaptersXXXVI. and LIII.Par. .This like the first part of The Soothsayer is obviously a referenceto the Schopenhauerian Pessimism.Pars. .These are supplementary to the discourse Backworldsmen.Par. .We must be careful to separate this paragraph in sense from theprevious four paragraphs. Nietzsche is still dealing with Pessimismhere but it is the pessimism of the herothe man most susceptible ofall to desperate views of life owing to the obstacles that are arrayedagainst him in a world where men of his kind are very rare and arecontinually being sacrificed. It was to save this man that Nietzschewrote. Heroism foiled thwarted and wrecked hoping and fighting untilthe last is at length overtaken by despair and renounces all strugglefor sleep. This is not the natural or constitutional pessimism whichproceeds from an unhealthy bodythe dyspeptics lack of appetite itis rather the desperation of the netted lion that ultimately stops allmovement because the more it moves the more involved it becomes.Par. .All that increases power is good all that springs from weakness isbad. The weak and illconstituted shall perish first principle of ourcharity. And one shall also help them thereto. Nietzsche partly divinedthe kind of reception moral values of this stamp would meet with atthe hands of the effeminate manhood of Europe. Here we see that he hadanticipated the most likely form their criticism would take see alsothe last two verses of par. .Par. .The first ten verses here are reminiscent of War and Warriors andof The Flies in the Marketplace. Verses and however areparticularly important. There is a strong argument in favour of thesharp differentiation of castes and of races and even of sexes seeNote on Chapter XVIII. running all through Nietzsches writings.But sharp differentiation also implies antagonism in some form orotherhence Nietzsches fears for modern men. What modern men desireabove all is peace and the cessation of pain. But neither great racesnor great castes have ever been built up in this way. Who still wantethto rule Zarathustra asks in the Prologue. Who still wanteth toobey Both are too burdensome. This is rapidly becoming everybodysattitude today. The tame moral reading of the face of nature togetherwith such democratic interpretations of life as those suggested byHerbert Spencer are signs of a physiological condition which is thereverse of that bounding and irresponsible healthiness in which harderand more tragic values rule.Par. .This should be read in conjunction with Child and Marriage. In thefifth verse we shall recognise our old friend Marriage on the tenyearssystem which George Meredith suggested some years ago. This howevermust not be taken too literally. I do not think Nietzsches profoundestviews on marriage were ever intended to be given over to the public atall at least not for the present. They appear in the biography by hissister and although their wisdom is unquestionable the nature of thereforms he suggests render it impossible for them to become popular justnow.Pars. .See Note on The Prologue.Par. .Nietzsche was not an iconoclast from predilection. No bitterness orempty hate dictated his vituperations against existing values andagainst the dogmas of his parents and forefathers. He knew too well whatthese things meant to the millions who profess them to approach thetask of uprooting them with levity or even with haste. He saw whatmodern anarchists and revolutionists do NOT seenamely that man is indanger of actual destruction when his customs and values are broken.I need hardly point out therefore how deeply he was conscious ofthe responsibility he threw upon our shoulders when he invited us toreconsider our position. The lines in this paragraph are evidence enoughof his earnestness.Chapter LVII. The Convalescent.We meet with several puzzles here. Zarathustra calls himself theadvocate of the circle the Eternal Recurrence of all things and hecalls this doctrine his abysmal thought. In the last verse of thefirst paragraph however after hailing his deepest thought he criesDisgust disgust disgust We know Nietzsches ideal man was thatworldapproving exuberant and vivacious creature who has not onlylearnt to compromise and arrange with that which was and is but wishesto have it again AS IT WAS AND IS for all eternity insatiably callingout da capo not only to himself but to the whole piece and play seeNote on Chapter XLII.. But if one ask oneself what the conditions tosuch an attitude are one will realise immediately how utterly differentNietzsche was from his ideal. The man who insatiably cries da capo tohimself and to the whole of his miseenscene must be in a position todesire every incident in his life to be repeated not once butagain and again eternally. Now Nietzsches life had been too full ofdisappointments illness unsuccessful struggles and snubs to allow ofhis thinking of the Eternal Recurrence without loathinghence probablythe words of the last verse.In verses and we have Nietzsche declaring himself an evolutionistin the broadest sensethat is to say that he believes in theDevelopment Hypothesis as the description of the process by whichspecies have originated. Now to understand his position correctlywe must show his relationship to the two greatest of modernevolutionistsDarwin and Spencer. As a philosopher however Nietzschedoes not stand or fall by his objections to the Darwinian or Spenceriancosmogony. He never laid claim to a very profound knowledge of biologyand his criticism is far more valuable as the attitude of a fresh mindthan as that of a specialist towards the question. Moreover in hisobjections many difficulties are raised which are not settled by anappeal to either of the men above mentioned. We have given Nietzschesdefinition of life in the Note on Chapter LVI. par. . Still thereremains a hope that Darwin and Nietzsche may some day become reconciledby a new description of the processes by which varieties occur. Theappearance of varieties among animals and of sporting plants inthe vegetable kingdom is still shrouded in mystery and the questionwhether this is not precisely the ground on which Darwin and Nietzschewill meet is an interesting one. The former says in his Origin ofSpecies concerning the causes of variability ...there are twofactors namely the nature of the organism and the nature of theconditions. THE FORMER SEEMS TO BE MUCH THE MORE IMPORTANT The italicsare mine. for nearly similar variations sometimes arise under asfar as we can judge dissimilar conditions and on the other handdissimilar variations arise under conditions which appear to benearly uniform. Nietzsche recognising this same truth would ascribepractically all the importance to the highest functionaries in theorganism in which the lifewill appears as an active and formativeprinciple and except in certain cases where passive organisms aloneare concerned would not give such a prominent place to the influenceof environment. Adaptation according to him is merely a secondaryactivity a mere reactivity and he is therefore quite opposed toSpencers definition Life is the continuous adjustment of internalrelations to external relations. Again in the motive force behindanimal and plant life Nietzsche disagrees with Darwin. Hetransforms the Struggle for Existencethe passive and involuntaryconditioninto the Struggle for Power which is active and creativeand much more in harmony with Darwins own view given above concerningthe importance of the organism itself. The change is one of suchfarreaching importance that we cannot dispose of it in a breath as amere play upon words. Much is reckoned higher than life itself by theliving one. Nietzsche says that to speak of the activity of life as astruggle for existence is to state the case inadequately. He warns usnot to confound Malthus with nature. There is something more thanthis struggle between the organic beings on this earth want which issupposed to bring this struggle about is not so common as is supposedsome other force must be operative. The Will to Power is this forcethe instinct of selfpreservation is only one of the indirect and mostfrequent results thereof. A certain lack of acumen in psychologicalquestions and the condition of affairs in England at the time Darwinwrote may both according to Nietzsche have induced the renownednaturalist to describe the forces of nature as he did in his Origin ofSpecies.In verses and of the second portion of this discourse we meetwith a doctrine which at first sight seems to be merely le manoira lenvers indeed one English critic has actually said of Nietzschethat Thus Spake Zarathustra is no more than a compendium of modernviews and maxims turned upside down. Examining these heterodoxpronouncements a little more closely however we may possibly perceivetheir truth. Regarding good and evil as purely relative values itstands to reason that what may be bad or evil in a given man relativeto a certain environment may actually be good if not highly virtuousin him relative to a certain other environment. If this hypothetical manrepresent the ascending line of lifethat is to say if he promise allthat which is highest in a GraecoRoman sense then it is likely thathe will be condemned as wicked if introduced into the society of menrepresenting the opposite and descending line of life.By depriving a man of his wickednessmore particularly nowadaystherefore one may unwittingly be doing violence to the greatest in him.It may be an outrage against his wholeness just as the loppingoff of aleg would be. Fortunately the natural socalled wickedness of highermen has in a certain measure been able to resist this lopping processwhich successive slavemoralities have practised but signs are notwanting which show that the noblest wickedness is fast vanishing fromsocietythe wickedness of courage and determinationand that Nietzschehad good reasons for crying Ah that mans baddest is so very smallAh that his best is so very small. What is good To be brave is goodIt is the good war which halloweth every cause see also par. Higher Man.Chapter LX. The Seven Seals.This is a final paean which Zarathustra sings to Eternity and themarriagering of rings the ring of the Eternal Recurrence. ...PART IV.In my opinion this part is Nietzsches open avowal that all hisphilosophy together with all his hopes enthusiastic outburstsblasphemies prolixities and obscurities were merely so many giftslaid at the feet of higher men. He had no desire to save the world. Whathe wished to determine was Who is to be master of the world This isa very different thing. He came to save higher mento give them thatfreedom by which alone they can develop and reach their zenith seeNote on Chapter LIV. end. It has been argued and with considerableforce that no such philosophy is required by higher men that as amatter of fact higher men by virtue of their constitutions always dostand Beyond Good and Evil and never allow anything to stand in theway of their complete growth. Nietzsche however was evidently not soconfident about this. He would probably have argued that we only see thesuccessful cases. Being a great man himself he was well aware of thedangers threatening greatness in our age. In Beyond Good and Evil hewrites There are few pains so grievous as to have seen divinedor experienced how an exceptional man has missed his way anddeteriorated... He knew from his painfullest recollections on whatwretched obstacles promising developments of the highest rank havehitherto usually gone to pieces broken down sunk and becomecontemptible. Now in Part IV. we shall find that his strongesttemptation to descend to the feeling of pity for his contemporariesis the cry for help which he hears from the lips of the higher menexposed to the dreadful danger of their modern environment.Chapter LXI. The Honey Sacrifice.In the fourteenth verse of this discourse Nietzsche defines the solemnduty he imposed upon himself Become what thou art. Surely thecriticism which has been directed against this maxim must all fall tothe ground when it is remembered once and for all that Nietzschesteaching was never intended to be other than an esoteric one. I am alaw only for mine own he says emphatically I am not a law forall. It is of the greatest importance to humanity that its highestindividuals should be allowed to attain to their full development foronly by means of its heroes can the human race be led forward step bystep to higher and yet higher levels. Become what thou art appliedto all of course becomes a vicious maxim it is to be hoped howeverthat we may learn in time that the same action performed by a givennumber of men loses its identity precisely that same number oftimes.Quod licet Jovi non licet bovi.At the last eight verses many readers may be tempted to laugh. InEngland we almost always laugh when a man takes himself seriously atanything save sport. And there is of course no reason why the readershould not be hilarious.A certain greatness is requisite both inorder to be sublime and to have reverence for the sublime. Nietzscheearnestly believed that the Zarathustrakingdomhis dynasty of athousand yearswould one day come if he had not believed it soearnestly if every artist in fact had not believed so earnestly inhis Hazar whether of ten fifteen a hundred or a thousand years weshould have lost all our higher men they would have become pessimistssuicides or merchants. If the minor poet and philosopher has made usshy of the prophetic seriousness which characterized an Isaiah or aJeremiah it is surely our loss and the minor poets gain.Chapter LXII. The Cry of Distress.We now meet with Zarathustra in extraordinary circumstances. He isconfronted with Schopenhauer and tempted by the old Soothsayer to committhe sin of pity. I have come that I may seduce thee to thy last sin says the Soothsayer to Zarathustra. It will be remembered that inSchopenhauers ethics pity is elevated to the highest place among thevirtues and very consistently too seeing that the Weltanschauung isa pessimistic one. Schopenhauer appeals to Nietzsches deepest andstrongest sentimenthis sympathy for higher men. Why dost thou concealthyself he cries. It is THE HIGHER MAN that calleth for thee Zarathustra is almost overcome by the Soothsayers pleading as hehad been once already in the past but he resists him step by step. Atlength he can withstand him no longer and on the plea that the higherman is on his ground and therefore under his protection Zarathustradeparts in search of him leaving Schopenhauera higher man inNietzsches opinionin the cave as a guest.Chapter LXIII. Talk with the Kings.On his way Zarathustra meets two more higher men of his time twokings cross his path. They are above the average modern type for theirinstincts tell them what real ruling is and they despise the mockerywhich they have been taught to call Reigning. We ARE NOT the firstmen they say and have nevertheless to STAND FOR them of thisimposture have we at last become weary and disgusted. It is the kingswho tell Zarathustra There is no sorer misfortune in all human destinythan when the mighty of the earth are not also the first men. Thereeverything becometh false and distorted and monstrous. The kings arealso asked by Zarathustra to accept the shelter of his cave whereuponhe proceeds on his way.Chapter LXIV. The Leech.Among the higher men whom Zarathustra wishes to save is also thescientific specialistthe man who honestly and scrupulously pursues hisinvestigations as Darwin did in one department of knowledge. I lovehim who liveth in order to know and seeketh to know in order that theSuperman may hereafter live. Thus seeketh he his own downgoing. The spiritually conscientious one he is called in this discourse.Zarathustra steps on him unawares and the slave of science bleedingfrom the violence he has done to himself by his selfimposed taskspeaks proudly of his little sphere of knowledgehis little handsbreadth of ground on Zarathustras territory philosophy. Where minehonesty ceaseth says the true scientific specialist there am I blindand want also to be blind. Where I want to know however there wantI also to be honestnamely severe rigorous restricted cruel andinexorable. Zarathustra greatly respecting this man invites him too tothe cave and then vanishes in answer to another cry for help.Chapter LXV. The Magician.The Magician is of course an artist and Nietzsches intimate knowledgeof perhaps the greatest artist of his age rendered the selection ofWagner as the type in this discourse almost inevitable. Most readerswill be acquainted with the facts relating to Nietzsches and Wagnersfriendship and ultimate separation. As a boy and a youth Nietzsche hadshown such a remarkable gift for music that it had been a question atone time whether he should not perhaps give up everything else in orderto develop this gift but he became a scholar notwithstanding althoughhe never entirely gave up composing and playing the piano. Whilestill in his teens he became acquainted with Wagners music andgrew passionately fond of it. Long before he met Wagner he must haveidealised him in his mind to an extent which only a profoundly artisticnature could have been capable of. Nietzsche always had high ideals forhumanity. If one were asked whether throughout his many changes therewas yet one aim one direction and one hope to which he held fastone would be forced to reply in the affirmative and declare that aimdirection and hope to have been the elevation of the type man. Now when Nietzsche met Wagner he was actually casting about for anincarnation of his dreams for the German people and we have only toremember his youth he was twentyone when he was introduced to Wagnerhis love of Wagners music and the undoubted power of the greatmusicians personality in order to realise how very uncritical hisattitude must have been in the first flood of his enthusiasm. Againwhen the friendship ripened we cannot well imagine Nietzsche theyounger man being anything less than intoxicated by his seniorsattention and love and we are therefore not surprised to find himpressing Wagner forward as the great Reformer and Saviour of mankind.Wagner in Bayreuth English Edition gives us the best proofof Nietzsches infatuation and although signs are not wanting in thisessay which show how clearly and even cruelly he was subconsciouslytaking stock of his friendeven then the work is a record of whatgreat love and admiration can do in the way of endowing the objectof ones affection with all the qualities and ideals that a fertileimagination can conceive.When the blow came it was therefore all the more severe. Nietzscheat length realised that the friend of his fancy and the real RichardWagnerthe composer of Parsifalwere not one the fact dawnedupon him slowly disappointment upon disappointment revelation afterrevelation ultimately brought it home to him and though his bestinstincts were naturally opposed to it at first the revulsion offeeling at last became too strong to be ignored and Nietzsche wasplunged into the blackest despair. Years after his break with Wagnerhe wrote The Case of Wagner and Nietzsche contra Wagner and theseworks are with us to prove the sincerity and depth of his views on theman who was the greatest event of his life.The poem in this discourse is of course reminiscent of Wagners ownpoetical manner and it must be remembered that the whole was writtensubsequent to Nietzsches final break with his friend. The dialoguebetween Zarathustra and the Magician reveals pretty fully what itwas that Nietzsche grew to loathe so intensely in Wagnerviz. hispronounced histrionic tendencies his dissembling powers his inordinatevanity his equivocalness his falseness. It honoureth thee saysZarathustra that thou soughtest for greatness but it betrayeth theealso. Thou art not great. The Magician is nevertheless sent as a guestto Zarathustras cave for in his heart Zarathustra believed until theend that the Magician was a higher man broken by modern values.Chapter LXVI. Out of Service.Zarathustra now meets the last pope and in a poetical form we getNietzsches description of the course Judaism and Christianity pursuedbefore they reached their final breakup in Atheism Agnosticism andthe like. The God of a strong warlike racethe God of Israelis ajealous revengeful God. He is a power that can be pictured and enduredonly by a hardy and courageous race a race rich enough to sacrifice andto lose in sacrifice. The image of this God degenerates with the peoplethat appropriate it and gradually He becomes a God of lovesoft andmellow a lower middleclass deity who is pitiful. He can no longerbe a God who requires sacrifice for we ourselves are no longer richenough for that. The tables are therefore turned upon Him HE mustsacrifice to us. His pity becomes so great that he actually doessacrifice something to usHis only begotten Son. Such a processcarried to its logical conclusions must ultimately end in His owndestruction and thus we find the pope declaring that God was one daysuffocated by His alltoogreat pity. What follows is clear enough.Zarathustra recognises another higher man in the expope and sends himtoo as a guest to the cave.Chapter LXVII. The Ugliest Man.This discourse contains perhaps the boldest of Nietzsches suggestionsconcerning Atheism as well as some extremely penetrating remarks uponthe sentiment of pity. Zarathustra comes across the repulsive creaturesitting on the wayside and what does he do He manifests the onlycorrect feelings that can be manifested in the presence of any greatmiserythat is to say shame reverence embarrassment. Nietzschedetested the obtrusive and gushing pity that goes up to misery withouta blush either on its cheek or in its heartthe pity which is onlyanother form of selfglorification. Thank God that I am not liketheeonly this selfglorifying sentiment can lend a wellconstitutedman the impudence to SHOW his pity for the cripple and theillconstituted. In the presence of the ugliest man Nietzscheblusheshe blushes for his race his own particular kind ofaltruismthe altruism that might have prevented the existence of thismanstrikes him with all its force. He will have the world otherwise.He will have a world where one need not blush for ones fellowshencehis appeal to us to love only our childrens land the land undiscoveredin the remotest sea.Zarathustra calls the ugliest man the murderer of God Certainly thisis one aspect of a certain kind of Atheismthe Atheism of the man whoreveres beauty to such an extent that his own ugliness which outrageshim must be concealed from every eye lest it should not be respected asZarathustra respected it. If there be a God He too must be evaded. Hispity must be foiled. But God is ubiquitous and omniscient. Thereforefor the really GREAT ugly man He must not exist. Their pity IS it fromwhich I flee away he saysthat is to say It is from their want ofreverence and lack of shame in presence of my great misery The ugliestman despises himself but Zarathustra said in his Prologue I lovethe great despisers because they are the great adorers and arrows oflonging for the other shore. He therefore honours the ugliest man seesheight in his selfcontempt and invites him to join the other highermen in the cave.Chapter LXVIII. The Voluntary Beggar.In this discourse we undoubtedly have the ideal Buddhist if notGautama Buddha himself. Nietzsche had the greatest respect for Buddhismand almost wherever he refers to it in his works it is in terms ofpraise. He recognised that though Buddhism is undoubtedly a religion fordecadents its decadent values emanate from the higher and not as inChristianity from the lower grades of society. In Aphorism of TheAntichrist he compares it exhaustively with Christianity andthe result of his investigation is very much in favour of the olderreligion. Still he recognised a most decided Buddhistic influencein Christs teaching and the words in verses and are veryreminiscent of his views in regard to the Christian Savior.The figure of Christ has been introduced often enough into fiction andmany scholars have undertaken to write His life according to their ownlights but few perhaps have ever attempted to present Him to us bereftof all those characteristics which a lack of the sense of harmony hasattached to His person through the ages in which His doctrines have beentaught. Now Nietzsche disagreed entirely with Renans view that Christwas le grand maitre en ironie in Aphorism of The Antichristhe says that he Nietzsche always purged his picture of the HumbleNazarene of all those bitter and spiteful outbursts which in view ofthe struggle the first Christians went through may very well have beenadded to the original character by Apologists and Sectarians who atthat time could ill afford to consider nice psychological pointsseeing that what they needed above all was a wrangling and abusivedeity. These two conflicting halves in the character of the Christ ofthe Gospels which no sound psychology can ever reconcile Nietzschealways kept distinct in his own mind he could not credit the same manwith sentiments sometimes so noble and at other times so vulgar andin presenting us with this new portrait of the Saviour purged of allimpurities Nietzsche rendered military honours to a foe which farexceed in worth all that His most ardent disciples have ever claimed forHim. In verse we are vividly reminded of Herbert Spencers words Lemariage de convenance is legalised prostitution.Chapter LXIX. The Shadow.Here we have a description of that courageous and wayward spirit thatliterally haunts the footsteps of every great thinker and every greatleader sometimes with the result that it loses all aims all hopesand all trust in a definite goal. It is the case of the bravest andmost broadminded men of today. These literally shadow the most daringmovements in the science and art of their generation they completelylose their bearings and actually find themselves in the end without away a goal or a home. On every surface have I already sat...I becomethin I am almost equal to a shadow At last in despair such mendo indeed cry out Nothing is true all is permitted and then theybecome mere wreckage. Too much hath become clear unto me now nothingmattereth to me any more. Nothing liveth any longer that I lovehowshould I still love myself Have I still a goal Where is MY home Zarathustra realises the danger threatening such a man. Thy danger isnot small thou free spirit and wanderer he says. Thou hast had a badday. See that a still worse evening doth not overtake thee The dangerZarathustra refers to is precisely this that even a prison may seem ablessing to such a man. At least the bars keep him in a place of resta place of confinement at its worst is real. Beware lest in the enda narrow faith capture thee says Zarathustra for now everything thatis narrow and fixed seduceth and tempteth thee.Chapter LXX. Noontide.At the noon of life Nietzsche said he entered the world with himman came of age. We are now held responsible for our actions our oldguardians the gods and demigods of our youth the superstitions andfears of our childhood withdraw the field lies open before us welived through our morning with but one masterchance let us see toit that we MAKE our afternoon our own see Note XLIX. Part III..Chapter LXXI. The Greeting.Here I think I may claim that my contention in regard to the purpose andaim of the whole of Nietzsches philosophy as stated at the beginningof my Notes on Part IV. is completely upheld. He fought for all whodo not want to live unless they learn again to HOPEunless THEY learnfrom him the GREAT hope Zarathustras address to his guests showsclearly enough how he wished to help them I DO NOT TREAT MY WARRIORSINDULGENTLY he says how then could ye be fit for MY warfare Herebukes and spurns them no word of love comes from his lips. Elsewherehe says a man should be a hard bed to his friend thus alone can he beof use to him. Nietzsche would be a hard bed to higher men. He wouldmake them harder for in order to be a law unto himself man mustpossess the requisite hardness. I wait for higher ones stronger onesmore triumphant ones merrier ones for such as are built squarely inbody and soul. He says in par. of Higher ManYe higher men think ye that I am here to put right what ye have putwrong Or that I wished henceforth to make snugger couches for yousufferers Or show you restless miswandering misclimbing ones new andeasier footpathsNay Nay Three times nay Always more always better ones of your typeshall succumbfor ye shall always have it worse and harder.Chapter LXXII. The Supper.In the first seven verses of this discourse I cannot help seeinga gentle allusion to Schopenhauers habits as a bonvivant. For apessimist be it remembered Schopenhauer led quite an extraordinarylife. He ate well loved well played the flute well and I believe hesmoked the best cigars. What follows is clear enough.Chapter LXXIII. The Higher Man. Par. .Nietzsche admits here that at one time he had thought of appealing tothe people to the crowd in the marketplace but that he had ultimatelyto abandon the task. He bids higher men depart from the marketplace.Par. .Here we are told quite plainly what class of men actually owe all theirimpulses and desires to the instinct of selfpreservation. The strugglefor existence is indeed the only spur in the case of such people.To them it matters not in what shape or condition man be preservedprovided only he survive. The transcendental maxim that Life per se isprecious is the ruling maxim here.Par. .In the Note on Chapter LVII. end I speak of Nietzsches elevation ofthe virtue Courage to the highest place among the virtues. Here hetells higher men the class of courage he expects from them.Pars. .These have already been referred to in the Notes on Chapters LVII. endand LXXI.Par. .I suggest that the last verse in this paragraph strongly confirms theview that Nietzsches teaching was always meant by him to be esotericand for higher man alone.Par. .In the last verse here another shaft of light is thrown upon theImmaculate Perception or socalled pure objectivity of the scientificmind. Freedom from fever is still far from being knowledge. Where amans emotions cease to accompany him in his investigations he isnot necessarily nearer the truth. Says Spencer in the Preface to hisAutobiographyIn the genesis of a system of thought the emotionalnature is a large factor perhaps as large a factor as the intellectualnature see pages of Vol. I. Thoughts out of Season.Pars. .When we approach Nietzsches philosophy we must be prepared to beindependent thinkers in fact the greatest virtue of his works isperhaps the subtlety with which they impose the obligation upon oneof thinking alone of scoring off ones own bat and of shiftingintellectually for oneself.Par. .I am a railing alongside the torrent whoever is able to grasp me maygrasp me Your crutch however I am not. These two paragraphs are anexhortation to higher men to become independent.Par. .Here Nietzsche perhaps exaggerates the importance of heredity. Ashowever the question is by no means one on which we are all agreedwhat he says is not without value.A very important principle in Nietzsches philosophy is enunciated inthe first verse of this paragraph. The higher its type always theseldomer doth a thing succeed see page of Beyond Good and Evil.Those who like some political economists talk in a businesslike wayabout the terrific waste of human life and energy deliberately overlookthe fact that the waste most to be deplored usually occurs amonghigher individuals. Economy was never precisely one of natures leadingprinciples. All this sentimental wailing over the larger proportionof failures than successes in human life does not seem to take intoaccount the fact that it is the rarest thing on earth for a highlyorganised being to attain to the fullest development and activity of allits functions simply because it is so highly organised. The blind Willto Power in nature therefore stands in urgent need of direction by man.Pars. .These paragraphs deal with Nietzsches protest against the democraticseriousness Pobelernst of modern times. All good things laugh hesays and his final command to the higher men is LEARN I pray youtolaugh. All that is GOOD in Nietzsches sense is cheerful. To be ableto crack a joke about ones deepest feelings is the greatest test oftheir value. The man who does not laugh like the man who does not makefaces is already a buffoon at heart.What hath hitherto been the greatest sin here on earth Was it not theword of him who said Woe unto them that laugh now Did he himselffind no cause for laughter on the earth Then he sought badly. A childeven findeth cause for it.Chapter LXXIV. The Song of Melancholy.After his address to the higher men Zarathustra goes out into theopen to recover himself. Meanwhile the magician Wagner seizing theopportunity in order to draw them all into his net once more sings theSong of Melancholy.Chapter LXXV. Science.The only one to resist the melancholy voluptuousness of his art isthe spiritually conscientious onethe scientific specialist of whom weread in the discourse entitled The Leech. He takes the harp from themagician and cries for air while reproving the musician in the styleof The Case of Wagner. When the magician retaliates by saying that thespiritually conscientious one could have understood little of his songthe latter replies Thou praisest me in that thou separatest me fromthyself. The speech of the scientific man to his fellow higher men iswell worth studying. By means of it Nietzsche pays a high tribute tothe honesty of the true specialist while in representing him as theonly one who can resist the demoniacal influence of the magiciansmusic he elevates him at a stroke above all those present. Zarathustraand the spiritually conscientious one join issue at the end on thequestion of the proper place of fear in mans history and Nietzscheavails himself of the opportunity in order to restate his viewsconcerning the relation of courage to humanity. It is precisely becausecourage has played the most important part in our development thathe would not see it vanish from among our virtues today. ...courageseemeth to me the entire primitive history of man.Chapter LXXVI. Among the Daughters of the Desert.This tells its own tale.Chapter LXXVII. The Awakening.In this discourse Nietzsche wishes to give his followers a warning.He thinks he has so far helped them that they have become convalescentthat new desires are awakened in them and that new hopes are in theirarms and legs. But he mistakes the nature of the change. True he hashelped them he has given them back what they most need i.e. belief inbelievingthe confidence in having confidence in something but howdo they use it This belief in faith if one can so express it withoutseeming tautological has certainly been restored to them and inthe first flood of their enthusiasm they use it by bowing down andworshipping an ass When writing this passage Nietzsche was obviouslythinking of the accusations which were levelled at the early Christiansby their pagan contemporaries. It is well known that they were supposednot only to be eaters of human flesh but also assworshippers and amongthe Roman graffiti the most famous is the one found on the Palatinoshowing a man worshipping a cross on which is suspended a figurewith the head of an ass see Minucius Felix Octavius IX. TacitusHistoriae v. Tertullian Apologia etc.. Nietzsches obviousmoral however is that great scientists and thinkers once they havereached the wall encircling scepticism and have thereby learned torecover their confidence in the act of believing as such usuallymanifest the change in their outlook by falling victims to the narrowestand most superstitious of creeds. So much for the introduction of theass as an object of worship.Now with regard to the actual service and AssFestival no reader whohappens to be acquainted with the religious history of the Middle Ageswill fail to see the allusion here to the asinaria festa which were byno means uncommon in France Germany and elsewhere in Europe during thethirteenth fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.Chapter LXXVIII. The AssFestival.At length in the middle of their feast Zarathustra bursts in uponthem and rebukes them soundly. But he does not do so long in theAssFestival it suddenly occurs to him that he is concerned with aceremony that may not be without its purpose as something foolish butnecessarya recreation for wise men. He is therefore highly pleasedthat the higher men have all blossomed forth they therefore requirenew festivalsA little valiant nonsense some divine service andassfestival some old joyful Zarathustra fool some blusterer to blowtheir souls bright.He tells them not to forget that night and the assfestival for suchthings only the convalescent devise And should ye celebrate it again he concludes do it from love to yourselves do it also from love tome And in remembrance of MEChapter LXXIX. The Drunken Song.It were the height of presumption to attempt to fix any particularinterpretation of my own to the words of this song. With what has gonebefore the reader while reading it as poetry should be able to seekand find his own meaning in it. The doctrine of the Eternal Recurrenceappears for the last time here in an artform. Nietzsche lays stressupon the fact that all happiness all delight longs for repetitionsand just as a child cries Again Again to the adult who happens tobe amusing him so the man who sees a meaning and a joyful meaning inexistence must also cry Again and yet Again to all his life.Chapter LXXX. The Sign.In this discourse Nietzsche disassociates himself finally from thehigher men and by the symbol of the lion wishes to convey to us thathe has won over and mastered the best and the most terrible in nature.That great power and tenderness are kin was already his belief ineight years before he wrote this speech and when the birds andthe lion come to him it is because he is the embodiment of the twoqualities. All that is terrible and great in nature the higher men arenot yet prepared for for they retreat horrorstricken into the cavewhen the lion springs at them but Zarathustra makes not a move towardsthem. He was tempted to them on the previous day he says but Thathath had its time My suffering and my fellowsufferingwhat matterabout them Do I then strive after HAPPINESS I strive after my workWell the lion hath come my children are nigh. Zarathustra hath grownripe. MY day beginneth ARISE NOW ARISE THOU GREAT NOONDAY ...The above I know to be open to much criticism. I shall be grateful toall those who will be kind enough to show me where and how I have gonewrong but I should like to point out that as they stand I have notgiven to these Notes by any means their final form.ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.London February .