CHAPTER I.I GO TO STYLESThe intense interest aroused in the public by what was known at thetime as The Styles Case has now somewhat subsided. Nevertheless inview of the worldwide notoriety which attended it I have been askedboth by my friend Poirot and the family themselves to write an accountof the whole story. This we trust will effectually silence thesensational rumours which still persist.I will therefore briefly set down the circumstances which led to mybeing connected with the affair.I had been invalided home from the Front and after spending somemonths in a rather depressing Convalescent Home was given a monthssick leave. Having no near relations or friends I was trying to makeup my mind what to do when I ran across John Cavendish. I had seenvery little of him for some years. Indeed I had never known himparticularly well. He was a good fifteen years my senior for onething though he hardly looked his fortyfive years. As a boy thoughI had often stayed at Styles his mothers place in Essex.We had a good yarn about old times and it ended in his inviting medown to Styles to spend my leave there.The mater will be delighted to see you againafter all those yearshe added.Your mother keeps well I asked.Oh yes. I suppose you know that she has married againI am afraid I showed my surprise rather plainly. Mrs. Cavendish whohad married Johns father when he was a widower with two sons had beena handsome woman of middleage as I remembered her. She certainly couldnot be a day less than seventy now. I recalled her as an energeticautocratic personality somewhat inclined to charitable and socialnotoriety with a fondness for opening bazaars and playing the LadyBountiful. She was a most generous woman and possessed a considerablefortune of her own.Their countryplace Styles Court had been purchased by Mr. Cavendishearly in their married life. He had been completely under his wifesascendancy so much so that on dying he left the place to her for herlifetime as well as the larger part of his income an arrangement thatwas distinctly unfair to his two sons. Their stepmother however hadalways been most generous to them indeed they were so young at thetime of their fathers remarriage that they always thought of her astheir own mother.Lawrence the younger had been a delicate youth. He had qualified as adoctor but early relinquished the profession of medicine and lived athome while pursuing literary ambitions though his verses never had anymarked success.John practised for some time as a barrister but had finally settleddown to the more congenial life of a country squire. He had married twoyears ago and had taken his wife to live at Styles though Ientertained a shrewd suspicion that he would have preferred his motherto increase his allowance which would have enabled him to have a homeof his own. Mrs. Cavendish however was a lady who liked to make herown plans and expected other people to fall in with them and in thiscase she certainly had the whip hand namely the purse strings.John noticed my surprise at the news of his mothers remarriage andsmiled rather ruefully.Rotten little bounder too he said savagely. I can tell youHastings its making life jolly difficult for us. As for Evieyouremember EvieNo.Oh I suppose she was after your time. Shes the maters factotumcompanion Jack of all trades A great sportold Evie Not preciselyyoung and beautiful but as game as they make them.You were going to sayOh this fellow He turned up from nowhere on the pretext of being asecond cousin or something of Evies though she didnt seemparticularly keen to acknowledge the relationship. The fellow is anabsolute outsider anyone can see that. Hes got a great black beardand wears patent leather boots in all weathers But the mater cottonedto him at once took him on as secretaryyou know how shes alwaysrunning a hundred societiesI nodded.Well of course the war has turned the hundreds into thousands. Nodoubt the fellow was very useful to her. But you could have knocked usall down with a feather when three months ago she suddenly announcedthat she and Alfred were engaged The fellow must be at least twentyyears younger than she is Its simply barefaced fortune hunting butthere you areshe is her own mistress and shes married him.It must be a difficult situation for you all.Difficult Its damnableThus it came about that three days later I descended from the trainat Styles St. Mary an absurd little station with no apparent reasonfor existence perched up in the midst of green fields and countrylanes. John Cavendish was waiting on the platform and piloted me outto the car.Got a drop or two of petrol still you see he remarked. Mainlyowing to the maters activities.The village of Styles St. Mary was situated about two miles from thelittle station and Styles Court lay a mile the other side of it. Itwas a still warm day in early July. As one looked out over the flatEssex country lying so green and peaceful under the afternoon sun itseemed almost impossible to believe that not so very far away a greatwar was running its appointed course. I felt I had suddenly strayedinto another world. As we turned in at the lodge gates John saidIm afraid youll find it very quiet down here Hastings.My dear fellow thats just what I want.Oh its pleasant enough if you want to lead the idle life. I drillwith the volunteers twice a week and lend a hand at the farms. My wifeworks regularly on the land. She is up at five every morning to milkand keeps at it steadily until lunchtime. Its a jolly good life takingit all roundif it werent for that fellow Alfred Inglethorp Hechecked the car suddenly and glanced at his watch. I wonder if wevetime to pick up Cynthia. No shell have started from the hospital bynow.Cynthia Thats not your wifeNo Cynthia is a protégée of my mothers the daughter of an oldschoolfellow of hers who married a rascally solicitor. He came acropper and the girl was left an orphan and penniless. My mother cameto the rescue and Cynthia has been with us nearly two years now. Sheworks in the Red Cross Hospital at Tadminster seven miles away.As he spoke the last words we drew up in front of the fine old house.A lady in a stout tweed skirt who was bending over a flower bedstraightened herself at our approach.Hullo Evie heres our wounded hero Mr. HastingsMiss Howard.Miss Howard shook hands with a hearty almost painful grip. I had animpression of very blue eyes in a sunburnt face. She was apleasantlooking woman of about forty with a deep voice almost manlyin its stentorian tones and had a large sensible square body withfeet to matchthese last encased in good thick boots. Her conversationI soon found was couched in the telegraphic style.Weeds grow like house afire. Cant keep even with em. Shall press youin. Better be careful.Im sure I shall be only too delighted to make myself useful Iresponded.Dont say it. Never does. Wish you hadnt later.Youre a cynic Evie said John laughing. Wheres tea todayinsideor outOut. Too fine a day to be cooped up in the house.Come on then youve done enough gardening for today. The laboureris worthy of his hire you know. Come and be refreshed.Well said Miss Howard drawing off her gardening gloves Iminclined to agree with you.She led the way round the house to where tea was spread under the shadeof a large sycamore.A figure rose from one of the basket chairs and came a few steps tomeet us.My wife Hastings said John.I shall never forget my first sight of Mary Cavendish. Her tallslender form outlined against the bright light the vivid sense ofslumbering fire that seemed to find expression only in those wonderfultawny eyes of hers remarkable eyes different from any other womansthat I have ever known the intense power of stillness she possessedwhich nevertheless conveyed the impression of a wild untamed spirit inan exquisitely civilised bodyall these things are burnt into mymemory. I shall never forget them.She greeted me with a few words of pleasant welcome in a low clearvoice and I sank into a basket chair feeling distinctly glad that Ihad accepted Johns invitation. Mrs. Cavendish gave me some tea andher few quiet remarks heightened my first impression of her as athoroughly fascinating woman. An appreciative listener is alwaysstimulating and I described in a humorous manner certain incidentsof my Convalescent Home in a way which I flatter myself greatlyamused my hostess. John of course good fellow though he is couldhardly be called a brilliant conversationalist.At that moment a well remembered voice floated through the open Frenchwindow near at handThen youll write to the Princess after tea Alfred Ill write toLady Tadminster for the second day myself. Or shall we wait until wehear from the Princess In case of a refusal Lady Tadminster mightopen it the first day and Mrs. Crosbie the second. Then theres theDuchessabout the school fête.There was the murmur of a mans voice and then Mrs. Inglethorps rosein replyYes certainly. After tea will do quite well. You are so thoughtfulAlfred dear.The French window swung open a little wider and a handsomewhitehaired old lady with a somewhat masterful cast of featuresstepped out of it on to the lawn. A man followed her a suggestion ofdeference in his manner.Mrs. Inglethorp greeted me with effusion.Why if it isnt too delightful to see you again Mr. Hastings afterall these years. Alfred darling Mr. Hastingsmy husband.I looked with some curiosity at Alfred darling. He certainly struck arather alien note. I did not wonder at John objecting to his beard. Itwas one of the longest and blackest I have ever seen. He woregoldrimmed pincenez and had a curious impassivity of feature. Itstruck me that he might look natural on a stage but was strangely outof place in real life. His voice was rather deep and unctuous. Heplaced a wooden hand in mine and saidThis is a pleasure Mr. Hastings. Then turning to his wife Emilydearest I think that cushion is a little damp.She beamed fondly on him as he substituted another with everydemonstration of the tenderest care. Strange infatuation of anotherwise sensible womanWith the presence of Mr. Inglethorp a sense of constraint and veiledhostility seemed to settle down upon the company. Miss Howard inparticular took no pains to conceal her feelings. Mrs. Inglethorphowever seemed to notice nothing unusual. Her volubility which Iremembered of old had lost nothing in the intervening years and shepoured out a steady flood of conversation mainly on the subject of theforthcoming bazaar which she was organizing and which was to take placeshortly. Occasionally she referred to her husband over a question ofdays or dates. His watchful and attentive manner never varied. From thevery first I took a firm and rooted dislike to him and I flattermyself that my first judgments are usually fairly shrewd.Presently Mrs. Inglethorp turned to give some instructions aboutletters to Evelyn Howard and her husband addressed me in hispainstaking voiceIs soldiering your regular profession Mr. HastingsNo before the war I was in Lloyds.And you will return there after it is overPerhaps. Either that or a fresh start altogether.Mary Cavendish leant forward.What would you really choose as a profession if you could justconsult your inclinationWell that depends.No secret hobby she asked. Tell meyoure drawn to somethingEveryone isusually something absurd.Youll laugh at me.She smiled.Perhaps.Well Ive always had a secret hankering to be a detectiveThe real thingScotland Yard Or Sherlock HolmesOh Sherlock Holmes by all means. But really seriously I am awfullydrawn to it. I came across a man in Belgium once a very famousdetective and he quite inflamed me. He was a marvellous little fellow.He used to say that all good detective work was a mere matter ofmethod. My system is based on histhough of course I have progressedrather further. He was a funny little man a great dandy butwonderfully clever.Like a good detective story myself remarked Miss Howard. Lots ofnonsense written though. Criminal discovered in last chapter. Everyonedumbfounded. Real crimeyoud know at once.There have been a great number of undiscovered crimes I argued.Dont mean the police but the people that are right in it. Thefamily. You couldnt really hoodwink them. Theyd know.Then I said much amused you think that if you were mixed up in acrime say a murder youd be able to spot the murderer right offOf course I should. Mightnt be able to prove it to a pack of lawyers.But Im certain Id know. Id feel it in my fingertips if he came nearme.It might be a she I suggested.Might. But murders a violent crime. Associate it more with a man.Not in a case of poisoning. Mrs. Cavendishs clear voice startled me.Dr. Bauerstein was saying yesterday that owing to the generalignorance of the more uncommon poisons among the medical professionthere were probably countless cases of poisoning quite unsuspected.Why Mary what a gruesome conversation cried Mrs. Inglethorp. Itmakes me feel as if a goose were walking over my grave. Oh theresCynthiaA young girl in V.A.D. uniform ran lightly across the lawn.Why Cynthia you are late today. This is Mr. HastingsMiss Murdoch.Cynthia Murdoch was a freshlooking young creature full of life andvigour. She tossed off her little V.A.D. cap and I admired the greatloose waves of her auburn hair and the smallness and whiteness of thehand she held out to claim her tea. With dark eyes and eyelashes shewould have been a beauty.She flung herself down on the ground beside John and as I handed her aplate of sandwiches she smiled up at me.Sit down here on the grass do. Its ever so much nicer.I dropped down obediently.You work at Tadminster dont you Miss MurdochShe nodded.For my sins.Do they bully you then I asked smiling.I should like to see them cried Cynthia with dignity.I have got a cousin who is nursing I remarked. And she is terrifiedof Sisters.I dont wonder. Sisters are you know Mr. Hastings. They simplyare Youve no idea But Im not a nurse thank heaven I work in thedispensary.How many people do you poison I asked smiling.Cynthia smiled too.Oh hundreds she said.Cynthia called Mrs. Inglethorp do you think you could write a fewnotes for meCertainly Aunt Emily.She jumped up promptly and something in her manner reminded me thather position was a dependent one and that Mrs. Inglethorp kind as shemight be in the main did not allow her to forget it.My hostess turned to me.John will show you your room. Supper is at halfpast seven. We havegiven up late dinner for some time now. Lady Tadminster our Memberswifeshe was the late Lord Abbotsburys daughterdoes the same. Sheagrees with me that one must set an example of economy. We are quite awar household nothing is wasted hereevery scrap of waste paper evenis saved and sent away in sacks.I expressed my appreciation and John took me into the house and up thebroad staircase which forked right and left halfway to differentwings of the building. My room was in the left wing and looked outover the park.John left me and a few minutes later I saw him from my window walkingslowly across the grass arm in arm with Cynthia Murdoch. I heard Mrs.Inglethorp call Cynthia impatiently and the girl started and ranback to the house. At the same moment a man stepped out from theshadow of a tree and walked slowly in the same direction. He lookedabout forty very dark with a melancholy cleanshaven face. Someviolent emotion seemed to be mastering him. He looked up at my windowas he passed and I recognized him though he had changed much in thefifteen years that had elapsed since we last met. It was Johns youngerbrother Lawrence Cavendish. I wondered what it was that had broughtthat singular expression to his face.Then I dismissed him from my mind and returned to the contemplation ofmy own affairs.The evening passed pleasantly enough and I dreamed that night of thatenigmatical woman Mary Cavendish.The next morning dawned bright and sunny and I was full of theanticipation of a delightful visit.I did not see Mrs. Cavendish until lunchtime when she volunteered totake me for a walk and we spent a charming afternoon roaming in thewoods returning to the house about five.As we entered the large hall John beckoned us both into thesmokingroom. I saw at once by his face that something disturbing hadoccurred. We followed him in and he shut the door after us.Look here Mary theres the deuce of a mess. Evies had a row withAlfred Inglethorp and shes off.Evie OffJohn nodded gloomily.Yes you see she went to the mater andOhheres Evie herself.Miss Howard entered. Her lips were set grimly together and she carrieda small suitcase. She looked excited and determined and slightly onthe defensive.At any rate she burst out Ive spoken my mindMy dear Evelyn cried Mrs. Cavendish this cant be trueMiss Howard nodded grimly.True enough Afraid I said some things to Emily she wont forget orforgive in a hurry. Dont mind if theyve only sunk in a bit. Probablywater off a ducks back though. I said right out Youre an oldwoman Emily and theres no fool like an old fool. The mans twentyyears younger than you and dont you fool yourself as to what hemarried you for. Money Well dont let him have too much of it. FarmerRaikes has got a very pretty young wife. Just ask your Alfred how muchtime he spends over there. She was very angry. Natural I went onIm going to warn you whether you like it or not. That man would assoon murder you in your bed as look at you. Hes a bad lot. You can saywhat you like to me but remember what Ive told you. Hes a bad lotWhat did she sayMiss Howard made an extremely expressive grimace.Darling Alfreddearest Alfredwicked calumnies wickedlieswicked womanto accuse her dear husband The sooner I lefther house the better. So Im off.But not nowThis minuteFor a moment we sat and stared at her. Finally John Cavendish findinghis persuasions of no avail went off to look up the trains. His wifefollowed him murmuring something about persuading Mrs. Inglethorp tothink better of it.As she left the room Miss Howards face changed. She leant towards meeagerly.Mr. Hastings youre honest. I can trust youI was a little startled. She laid her hand on my arm and sank hervoice to a whisper.Look after her Mr. Hastings. My poor Emily. Theyre a lot ofsharksall of them. Oh I know what Im talking about. There isnt oneof them thats not hard up and trying to get money out of her. Iveprotected her as much as I could. Now Im out of the way theyllimpose upon her.Of course Miss Howard I said Ill do everything I can but Imsure youre excited and overwrought.She interrupted me by slowly shaking her forefinger.Young man trust me. Ive lived in the world rather longer than youhave. All I ask you is to keep your eyes open. Youll see what I mean.The throb of the motor came through the open window and Miss Howardrose and moved to the door. Johns voice sounded outside. With her handon the handle she turned her head over her shoulder and beckoned tome.Above all Mr. Hastings watch that devilher husbandThere was no time for more. Miss Howard was swallowed up in an eagerchorus of protests and goodbyes. The Inglethorps did not appear.As the motor drove away Mrs. Cavendish suddenly detached herself fromthe group and moved across the drive to the lawn to meet a tallbearded man who had been evidently making for the house. The colourrose in her cheeks as she held out her hand to him.Who is that I asked sharply for instinctively I distrusted the man.Thats Dr. Bauerstein said John shortly.And who is Dr. BauersteinHes staying in the village doing a rest cure after a bad nervousbreakdown. Hes a London specialist a very clever manone of thegreatest living experts on poisons I believe.And hes a great friend of Marys put in Cynthia the irrepressible.John Cavendish frowned and changed the subject.Come for a stroll Hastings. This has been a most rotten business. Shealways had a rough tongue but there is no stauncher friend in Englandthan Evelyn Howard.He took the path through the plantation and we walked down to thevillage through the woods which bordered one side of the estate.As we passed through one of the gates on our way home again a prettyyoung woman of gipsy type coming in the opposite direction bowed andsmiled.Thats a pretty girl I remarked appreciatively.Johns face hardened.That is Mrs. Raikes.The one that Miss HowardExactly said John with rather unnecessary abruptness.I thought of the whitehaired old lady in the big house and that vividwicked little face that had just smiled into ours and a vague chill offoreboding crept over me. I brushed it aside.Styles is really a glorious old place I said to John.He nodded rather gloomily.Yes its a fine property. Itll be mine some dayshould be mine nowby rights if my father had only made a decent will. And then Ishouldnt be so damned hard up as I am now.Hard up are youMy dear Hastings I dont mind telling you that Im at my wits endfor money.Couldnt your brother help youLawrence Hes gone through every penny he ever had publishing rottenverses in fancy bindings. No were an impecunious lot. My mothersalways been awfully good to us I must say. That is up to now. Sinceher marriage of course he broke off frowning.For the first time I felt that with Evelyn Howard somethingindefinable had gone from the atmosphere. Her presence had speltsecurity. Now that security was removedand the air seemed rife withsuspicion. The sinister face of Dr. Bauerstein recurred to meunpleasantly. A vague suspicion of everyone and everything filled mymind. Just for a moment I had a premonition of approaching evil.CHAPTER II.THE TH AND TH OF JULYI had arrived at Styles on the th of July. I come now to the events ofthe th and th of that month. For the convenience of the reader Iwill recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner aspossible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process oflong and tedious crossexaminations.I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after herdeparture telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital inMiddlingham a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away and beggingme to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to bereconciled.The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendishsextraordinary and for my part unaccountable preference for thesociety of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imaginebut she was always asking him up to the house and often went off forlong expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable tosee his attraction.The th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famousbazaar had taken place on Saturday and an entertainment in connectionwith the same charity at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a Warpoem was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morningarranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to takeplace. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in thegarden. I noticed that Johns manner was somewhat unusual. He seemedvery excited and restless.After tea Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her effortsin the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.About a quarter to seven Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should belate as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to getready in time and before the meal was over the motor was waiting atthe door.The entertainment was a great success Mrs. Inglethorps recitationreceiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in whichCynthia took part. She did not return with us having been asked to asupper party and to remain the night with some friends who had beenacting with her in the tableaux.The following morning Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast asshe was rather overtired but she appeared in her briskest mood about. and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminsterssister you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conquerorone ofour oldest families.Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.Bauerstein.We had a pleasant luncheon and as we drove away Lawrence suggestedthat we should return by Tadminster which was barely a mile out of ourway and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorpreplied that this was an excellent idea but as she had several lettersto write she would drop us there and we could come back with Cynthiain the ponytrap.We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter until Cynthiaappeared to vouch for us looking very cool and sweet in her long whiteoverall. She took us up to her sanctum and introduced us to her fellowdispenser a rather aweinspiring individual whom Cynthia cheerilyaddressed as Nibs.What a lot of bottles I exclaimed as my eye travelled round thesmall room. Do you really know whats in them allSay something original groaned Cynthia. Every single person whocomes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize onthe first individual who does not say What a lot of bottles And Iknow the next thing youre going to say is How many people have youpoisonedI pleaded guilty with a laugh.If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone bymistake you wouldnt joke about it. Come on lets have tea. Weve gotall sorts of secret stores in that cupboard. No Lawrencethats thepoison cupboard. The big cupboardthats right.We had a very cheery tea and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.We had just put away the last teaspoon when a knock came at the door.The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into astern and forbidding expression.Come in said Cynthia in a sharp professional tone.A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle whichshe proffered to Nibs who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhatenigmatical remarkIm not really here today.Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.This should have been sent up this morning.Sister is very sorry. She forgot.Sister should read the rules outside the door.I gathered from the little nurses expression that there was not theleast likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message tothe dreaded Sister.So now it cant be done until tomorrow finished Cynthia.Dont you think you could possibly let us have it tonightWell said Cynthia graciously we are very busy but if we have timeit shall be done.The little nurse withdrew and Cynthia promptly took a jar from theshelf refilled the bottle and placed it on the table outside thedoor.I laughed.Discipline must be maintainedExactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outsidewards there.I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the differentwards to me. Lawrence remained behind but after a few moments Cynthiacalled to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked ather watch.Nothing more to do NibsNo.All right. Then we can lock up and go.I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Comparedto John he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He wasthe opposite of his brother in almost every respect being unusuallyshy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner and I fanciedthat if one really knew him well one could have a deep affection forhim. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was ratherconstrained and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.But they were both gay enough this afternoon and chatted together likea couple of children.As we drove through the village I remembered that I wanted somestamps so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.As I came out again I cannoned into a little man who was justentering. I drew aside and apologised when suddenly with a loudexclamation he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.Mon ami Hastings he cried. It is indeed mon ami HastingsPoirot I exclaimed.I turned to the ponytrap.This is a very pleasant meeting for me Miss Cynthia. This is my oldfriend Monsieur Poirot whom I have not seen for years.Oh we know Monsieur Poirot said Cynthia gaily. But I had no ideahe was a friend of yours.Yes indeed said Poirot seriously. I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. Itis by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here. Thenas I looked at him inquiringly Yes my friend she had kindlyextended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who alas arerefugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember herwith gratitude.Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more thanfive feet four inches but carried himself with great dignity. Hishead was exactly the shape of an egg and he always perched it a littleon one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness ofhis attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would havecaused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandifiedlittle man who I was sorry to see now limped badly had been in histime one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As adetective his flair had been extraordinary and he had achievedtriumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellowBelgians and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then heraised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia and we drove away.Hes a dear little man said Cynthia. Id no idea you knew him.Youve been entertaining a celebrity unawares I replied.And for the rest of the way home I recited to them the variousexploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall Mrs.Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.Oh its you she said.Is there anything the matter Aunt Emily asked Cynthia.Certainly not said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. What should there beThen catching sight of Dorcas the parlourmaid going into thediningroom she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.Yes mm. The old servant hesitated then added diffidently Dontyou think mm youd better get to bed Youre looking very tired.Perhaps youre right Dorcasyesnonot now. Ive some letters I mustfinish by posttime. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I toldyouYes mm.Then Ill go to bed directly after supper.She went into the boudoir again and Cynthia stared after her.Goodness gracious I wonder whats up she said to Lawrence.He did not seem to have heard her for without a word he turned on hisheel and went out of the house.I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and Cynthia agreeingI ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancybut she too was looking odd and disturbed.Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein I asked trying to appear asindifferent as I could.I didnt go she replied abruptly. Where is Mrs. InglethorpIn the boudoir.Her hand clenched itself on the banisters then she seemed to nerveherself for some encounter and went rapidly past me down the stairsacross the hall to the boudoir the door of which she shut behind her.As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later I had to pass theopen boudoir window and was unable to help overhearing the followingscrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a womandesperately controlling herselfThen you wont show it to meTo which Mrs. Inglethorp repliedMy dear Mary it has nothing to do with that matter.Then show it to me.I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in theleast.To which Mary Cavendish replied with a rising bitternessOf course I might have known you would shield him.Cynthia was waiting for me and greeted me eagerly withI say Theres been the most awful row Ive got it all out ofDorcas.What kind of a rowBetween Aunt Emily and him. I do hope shes found him out at lastWas Dorcas there thenOf course not. She happened to be near the door. It was a real oldbustup. I do wish I knew what it was all about.I thought of Mrs. Raikess gipsy face and Evelyn Howards warningsbut wisely decided to hold my peace whilst Cynthia exhausted everypossible hypothesis and cheerfully hoped Aunt Emily will send himaway and will never speak to him again.I was anxious to get hold of John but he was nowhere to be seen.Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I triedto forget the few words I had overheard but do what I would I couldnot dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendishsconcern in the matterMr. Inglethorp was in the drawingroom when I came down to supper. Hisface was impassive as ever and the strange unreality of the man struckme afresh.Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated and duringthe meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp wasunusually quiet. As a rule he surrounded his wife with littleattentions placing a cushion at her back and altogether playing thepart of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper Mrs. Inglethorpretired to her boudoir again.Send my coffee in here Mary she called. Ive just five minutes tocatch the post.Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawingroom. MaryCavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.Do you young people want lights or do you enjoy the twilight sheasked. Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee Cynthia I will pourit out.Do not trouble Mary said Inglethorp. I will take it to Emily. Hepoured it out and went out of the room carrying it carefully.Lawrence followed him and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night hot andstill. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.Its almost too hot she murmured. We shall have a thunderstorm.Alas that these harmonious moments can never endure My paradise wasrudely shattered by the sound of a well known and heartily dislikedvoice in the hall.Dr. Bauerstein exclaimed Cynthia. What a funny time to come.I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish but she seemed quiteundisturbed the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.In a few moments Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in thelatter laughing and protesting that he was in no fit state for adrawingroom. In truth he presented a sorry spectacle being literallyplastered with mud.What have you been doing doctor cried Mrs. Cavendish.I must make my apologies said the doctor. I did not really mean tocome in but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.Well Bauerstein you are in a plight said John strolling in fromthe hall. Have some coffee and tell us what you have been up to.Thank you I will. He laughed rather ruefully as he described how hehad discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible placeand in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing and slippedignominiously into a neighbouring pond.The sun soon dried me off he added but Im afraid my appearance isvery disreputable.At this juncture Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall andthe girl ran out.Just carry up my despatchcase will you dear Im going to bed.The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia didJohn was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who couldswear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee as yet untasted inher hand.My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at lasthowever and I breathed a sigh of relief.Ill walk down to the village with you said Mr. Inglethorp. I mustsee our agent over those estate accounts. He turned to John. No oneneed sit up. I will take the latchkey.CHAPTER III.THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDYTo make this part of my story clear I append the following plan of thefirst floor of Styles. The servants rooms are reached through the doorB. They have no communication with the right wing where theInglethorps rooms were situated.IllustrationIt seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by LawrenceCavendish. He had a candle in his hand and the agitation of his facetold me at once that something was seriously wrong.Whats the matter I asked sitting up in bed and trying to collectmy scattered thoughts.We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kindof fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.Ill come at once.I sprang out of bed and pulling on a dressinggown followed Lawrencealong the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.John Cavendish joined us and one or two of the servants were standinground in a state of awestricken excitement. Lawrence turned to hisbrother.What do you think we had better doNever I thought had his indecision of character been more apparent.John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorps door violently but withno effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The wholehousehold was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audiblefrom the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.Try going through Mr. Inglethorps room sir cried Dorcas. Oh thepoor mistressSuddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with usthat healone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of hisroom. It was pitch dark but Lawrence was following with the candleand by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in andthat there was no sign of the room having been occupied.We went straight to the connecting door. That too was locked orbolted on the inside. What was to be doneOh dear sir cried Dorcas wringing her hands what ever shall wedoWe must try and break the door in I suppose. Itll be a tough jobthough. Here let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell himto go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then well have a try at the door.Half a moment though isnt there a door into Miss Cynthias roomsYes sir but thats always bolted. Its never been undone.Well we might just see.He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthias room. Mary Cavendish wasthere shaking the girlwho must have been an unusually soundsleeperand trying to wake her.In a moment or two he was back.No good. Thats bolted too. We must break in the door. I think thisone is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solidand for a long time it resisted our efforts but at last we felt itgive beneath our weight and finally with a resounding crash it wasburst open.We stumbled in together Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.Inglethorp was lying on the bed her whole form agitated by violentconvulsions in one of which she must have overturned the table besideher. As we entered however her limbs relaxed and she fell back uponthe pillows.John strode across the room and lit the gas. Turning to Annie one ofthe housemaids he sent her downstairs to the diningroom for brandy.Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gaveon the corridor.I turned to Lawrence to suggest that I had better leave them now thatthere was no further need of my services but the words were frozen onmy lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any mans face. Hewas white as chalk the candle he held in his shaking hand wassputtering onto the carpet and his eyes petrified with terror orsome such kindred emotion stared fixedly over my head at a point onthe further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turnedhim to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes but Icould see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in thegrate and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece were surelyharmless enough.The violence of Mrs. Inglethorps attack seemed to be passing. She wasable to speak in short gasps.Better nowvery suddenstupid of meto lock myself in.A shadow fell on the bed and looking up I saw Mary Cavendish standingnear the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supportingthe girl who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face washeavily flushed and she yawned repeatedly.Poor Cynthia is quite frightened said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clearvoice. She herself I noticed was dressed in her white land smock.Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak ofdaylight was showing through the curtains of the windows and that theclock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five oclock.A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seizedthe unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terribleto behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her powerlessto help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed untilshe appeared to rest upon her head and her heels with her body archedin an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administermore brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in thatpeculiar fashion.At that moment Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into theroom. For one instant he stopped dead staring at the figure on thebed and at the same instant Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangledvoice her eyes fixed on the doctorAlfredAlfred Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.With a stride the doctor reached the bed and seizing her arms workedthem energetically applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious waveof his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him fascinatedthough I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late and thatnothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his facethat he himself had little hope.Finally he abandoned his task shaking his head gravely. At thatmoment we heard footsteps outside and Dr. Wilkins Mrs. Inglethorpsown doctor a portly fussy little man came bustling in.In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to bepassing the lodge gates as the car came out and had run up to thehouse as fast as he could whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.With a faint gesture of the hand he indicated the figure on the bed.Very sad. Very sad murmured Dr. Wilkins. Poor dear lady. Alwaysdid far too muchfar too muchagainst my advice. I warned her. Herheart was far from strong. Take it easy I said to herTakeiteasy. But noher zeal for good works was too great. Naturerebelled. Naturerebelled.Dr. Bauerstein I noticed was watching the local doctor narrowly. Hestill kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.The convulsions were of a peculiar violence Dr. Wilkins. I am sorryyou were not here in time to witness them. They were quitetetanic incharacter.Ah said Dr. Wilkins wisely.I should like to speak to you in private said Dr. Bauerstein. Heturned to John. You do not objectCertainly not.We all trooped out into the corridor leaving the two doctors aloneand I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have acertain talent for deduction and Dr. Bauersteins manner had started aflock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon myarm.What is it Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem sopeculiarI looked at her.Do you know what I thinkWhatListen I looked round the others were out of earshot. I lowered myvoice to a whisper. I believe she has been poisoned Im certain Dr.Bauerstein suspects it.What She shrank against the wall the pupils of her eyes dilatingwildly. Then with a sudden cry that startled me she cried out Nononot thatnot that And breaking from me fled up the stairs. Ifollowed her afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaningagainst the bannisters deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.No noleave me. Id rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for aminute or two. Go down to the others.I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the diningroom. Ijoined them. We were all silent but I suppose I voiced the thoughts ofus all when I at last broke it by sayingWhere is Mr. InglethorpJohn shook his head.Hes not in the house.Our eyes met. Where was Alfred Inglethorp His absence was strangeand inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorps dying words. What laybeneath them What more could she have told us if she had had timeAt last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins waslooking important and excited and trying to conceal an inwardexultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained inthe background his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was thespokesman for the two. He addressed himself to JohnMr. Cavendish I should like your consent to a postmortem.Is that necessary asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed hisface.Absolutely said Dr. Bauerstein.You mean by thatThat neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificateunder the circumstances.John bent his head.In that case I have no alternative but to agree.Thank you said Dr. Wilkins briskly. We propose that it should takeplace tomorrow nightor rather tonight. And he glanced at thedaylight. Under the circumstances I am afraid an inquest can hardlybe avoidedthese formalities are necessary but I beg that you wontdistress yourselves.There was a pause and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from hispocket and handed them to John.These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and in myopinion they would be better kept locked for the present.The doctors then departed.I had been turning over an idea in my head and I felt that the momenthad now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. JohnI knew had a horror of any kind of publicity and was an easygoingoptimist who preferred never to meet trouble halfway. It might bedifficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence on theother hand being less conventional and having more imagination Ifelt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the momenthad come for me to take the lead.John I said I am going to ask you something.WellYou remember my speaking of my friend Poirot The Belgian who is hereHe has been a most famous detective.Yes.I want you to let me call him into investigate this matter.Whatnow Before the postmortemYes time is an advantage ififthere has been foul play.Rubbish cried Lawrence angrily. In my opinion the whole thing is amares nest of Bauersteins Wilkins hadnt an idea of such a thinguntil Bauerstein put it into his head. But like all specialistsBauersteins got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby so ofcourse he sees them everywhere.I confess that I was surprised by Lawrences attitude. He was so seldomvehement about anything.John hesitated.I cant feel as you do Lawrence he said at last. Im inclined togive Hastings a free hand though I should prefer to wait a bit. Wedont want any unnecessary scandal.No no I cried eagerly you need have no fear of that. Poirot isdiscretion itself.Very well then have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.Though if it is as we suspect it seems a clear enough case. Godforgive me if I am wronging himI looked at my watch. It was six oclock. I determined to lose no time.Five minutes delay however I allowed myself. I spent it inransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave adescription of strychnine poisoning.CHAPTER IV.POIROT INVESTIGATESThe house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close tothe park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through thelong grass which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So Iaccordingly went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge when myattention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been How did he intend to explainhis absenceHe accosted me eagerly.My God This is terrible My poor wife I have only just heard.Where have you been I asked.Denby kept me late last night. It was one oclock before wedfinished. Then I found that Id forgotten the latchkey after all. Ididnt want to arouse the household so Denby gave me a bed.How did you hear the news I asked.Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily She was soselfsacrificingsuch a noble character. She overtaxed her strength.A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the manwasI must hurry on I said thankful that he did not ask me whither Iwas bound.In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.Getting no answer I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above mewas cautiously opened and Poirot himself looked out.He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief wordsI explained the tragedy that had occurred and that I wanted his help.Wait my friend I will let you in and you shall recount to me theaffair whilst I dress.In a few moments he had unbarred the door and I followed him up to hisroom. There he installed me in a chair and I related the whole storykeeping back nothing and omitting no circumstance howeverinsignificant whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.I told him of my awakening of Mrs. Inglethorps dying words of herhusbands absence of the quarrel the day before of the scrap ofconversation between Mary and her motherinlaw that I had overheardof the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard and ofthe latters innuendoes.I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several timesand occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.Poirot smiled kindly on me.The mind is confused Is it not so Take time mon ami. You areagitated you are excitedit is but natural. Presently when we arecalmer we will arrange the facts neatly each in his proper place. Wewill examineand reject. Those of importance we will put on one sidethose of no importance poufhe screwed up his cherublike face andpuffed comically enoughblow them awayThats all very well I objected but how are you going to decidewhat is important and what isnt That always seems the difficulty tome.Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustachewith exquisite care.Not so. Voyons One fact leads to anotherso we continue. Does thenext fit in with that A merveille Good We can proceed. This nextlittle factno Ah that is curious There is something missinga linkin the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that littlecurious fact that possibly paltry little detail that will not tallywe put it here He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. It issignificant It is tremendousYesAh Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailedbefore it. Beware Peril to the detective who says It is so smallitdoes not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it. That way liesconfusion Everything matters.I know. You always told me that. Thats why I have gone into all thedetails of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory and you have givenme the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them I saynothingtruly it is deplorable But I make allowancesyou are upset.To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact ofparamount importance.What is that I asked.You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little mans brain. Hewas carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on andseemed wholly engrossed in the task.I dont remember I said. And anyway I dont seeYou do not see But it is of the first importance.I cant see why I said rather nettled. As far as I can remembershe didnt eat much. She was obviously upset and it had taken herappetite away. That was only natural.Yes said Poirot thoughtfully it was only natural.He opened a drawer and took out a small despatchcase then turned tome.Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château and study matters onthe spot. Excuse me mon ami you dressed in haste and your tie ison one side. Permit me. With a deft gesture he rearranged it.Ça y est Now shall we startWe hurried up the village and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirotstopped for a moment and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanseof park still glittering with morning dew.So beautiful so beautiful and yet the poor family plunged insorrow prostrated with grief.He looked at me keenly as he spoke and I was aware that I reddenedunder his prolonged gaze.Was the family prostrated by grief Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorpsdeath so great I realized that there was an emotional lack in theatmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Herdeath was a shock and a distress but she would not be passionatelyregretted.Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.No you are right he said it is not as though there was a bloodtie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes but she wasnot their own mother. Blood tellsalways remember thatblood tells.Poirot I said I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know ifMrs. Inglethorp ate well last night I have been turning it over in mymind but I cant see how it has anything to do with the matterHe was silent for a minute or two as we walked along but finally hesaidI do not mind telling youthough as you know it is not my habit toexplain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning presumably administered in hercoffee.YesWell what time was the coffee servedAbout eight oclock.Therefore she drank it between then and halfpast eightcertainly notmuch later. Well strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effectswould be felt very soon probably in about an hour. Yet in Mrs.Inglethorps case the symptoms do not manifest themselves until fiveoclock the next morning nine hours But a heavy meal taken at aboutthe same time as the poison might retard its effects though hardly tothat extent. Still it is a possibility to be taken into account. Butaccording to you she ate very little for supper and yet the symptomsdo not develop until early the next morning Now that is a curiouscircumstance my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explainit. In the meantime remember it.As we neared the house John came out and met us. His face looked wearyand haggard.This is a very dreadful business Monsieur Poirot he said. Hastingshas explained to you that we are anxious for no publicityI comprehend perfectly.You see it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.John turned to me taking out his cigarettecase and lighting acigarette as he did so.You know that fellow Inglethorp is backYes. I met him.John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed a proceeding whichwas too much for Poirots feelings. He retrieved it and buried itneatly.Its jolly difficult to know how to treat him.That difficulty will not exist long pronounced Poirot quietly.John looked puzzled not quite understanding the portent of thiscryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had givenhim to me.Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.The rooms are locked asked Poirot.Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.Poirot nodded thoughtfully.Then he is very sure. Well that simplifies matters for us.We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience Iappend a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture init.IllustrationPoirot locked the door on the inside and proceeded to a minuteinspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with theagility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door fearing to obliterateany clues. Poirot however did not seem grateful to me for myforbearance.What have you my friend he cried that you remain there likehowdo you say itah yes the stuck pigI explained that I was afraid of obliterating any footmarks.Footmarks But what an idea There has already been practically anarmy in the room What footmarks are we likely to find No come hereand aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I needit.He did so on the round table by the window but it was an illadvisedproceeding for the top of it being loose it tilted up andprecipitated the despatchcase on the floor.Eh voilà une table cried Poirot. Ah my friend one may live in abig house and yet have no comfort.After which piece of moralizing he resumed his search.A small purple despatchcase with a key in the lock on thewritingtable engaged his attention for some time. He took out the keyfrom the lock and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiarhowever. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type with a bit of twistedwire through the handle.Next he examined the framework of the door we had broken in assuringhimself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the dooropposite leading into Cynthias room. That door was also bolted as Ihad stated. However he went to the length of unbolting it and openingand shutting it several times this he did with the utmost precautionagainst making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemedto rivet his attention. He examined it carefully and then nimblywhipping out a pair of small forceps from his case he drew out someminute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a smallsaucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in thesaucepan and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stoodnear it.I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger intoliquid and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.CocoawithI thinkrum in it.He passed on to the debris on the floor where the table by the bed hadbeen overturned. A readinglamp some books matches a bunch of keysand the crushed fragments of a coffeecup lay scattered about.Ah this is curious said Poirot.I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.You do not Observe the lampthe chimney is broken in two places theylie there as they fell. But see the coffeecup is absolutely smashedto powder.Well I said wearily I suppose someone must have stepped on it.Exactly said Poirot in an odd voice. Someone stepped on it.He rose from his knees and walked slowly across to the mantelpiecewhere he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments and straighteningthema trick of his when he was agitated.Mon ami he said turning to me somebody stepped on that cupgrinding it to powder and the reason they did so was either because itcontained strychnine orwhich is far more seriousbecause it did notcontain strychnineI made no reply. I was bewildered but I knew that it was no goodasking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself and wenton with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from thefloor and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected onevery bright and shining which he tried in the lock of the purpledespatchcase. It fitted and he opened the box but after a momentshesitation closed and relocked it and slipped the bunch of keys aswell as the key that had originally stood in the lock into his ownpocket.I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should bedoneat onceHe then made a very careful examination of the drawers of thewashstand. Crossing the room to the lefthand window a round stainhardly visible on the dark brown carpet seemed to interest himparticularly. He went down on his knees examining it minutelyevengoing so far as to smell it.Finally he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube sealingit up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.We have found in this room he said writing busily six points ofinterest. Shall I enumerate them or will youOh you I replied hastily.Very well then. One a coffeecup that has been ground into powdertwo a despatchcase with a key in the lock three a stain on thefloor.That may have been done some time ago I interrupted.No for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four afragment of some dark green fabriconly a thread or two butrecognizable.Ah I cried. That was what you sealed up in the envelope.Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorps owndresses and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five this With adramatic gesture he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on thefloor by the writingtable. It must have been done since yesterdayotherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it withblottingpaper and a hot iron. One of my best hats oncebut that is notto the point.It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhapsMrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.You brought only one candle into the roomYes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. Heseemed to see something over hereI indicated the mantelpiecethatabsolutely paralysed him.That is interesting said Poirot quickly. Yes it is suggestivehiseye sweeping the whole length of the wallbut it was not his candlethat made this great patch for you perceive that this is white greasewhereas Monsieur Lawrences candle which is still on thedressingtable is pink. On the other hand Mrs. Inglethorp had nocandlestick in the room only a readinglamp.Then I said what do you deduceTo which my friend only made a rather irritating reply urging me touse my own natural faculties.And the sixth point I asked. I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.No said Poirot thoughtfully. I might have included that in the sixbut I did not. No the sixth point I will keep to myself for thepresent.He looked quickly round the room. There is nothing more to be donehere I think unlesshe stared earnestly and long at the dead ashesin the grate. The fire burnsand it destroys. But by chancetheremight belet us seeDeftly on hands and knees he began to sort the ashes from the grateinto the fender handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly hegave a faint exclamation.The forceps HastingsI quickly handed them to him and with skill he extracted a small pieceof half charred paper.There mon ami he cried. What do you think of thatI scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of itIllustrationI was puzzled. It was unusually thick quite unlike ordinary notepaper.Suddenly an idea struck me.Poirot I cried. This is a fragment of a willExactly.I looked up at him sharply.You are not surprisedNo he said gravely I expected it.I relinquished the piece of paper and watched him put it away in hiscase with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. Mybrain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will Who haddestroyed it The person who had left the candle grease on the floorObviously. But how had anyone gained admission All the doors had beenbolted on the inside.Now my friend said Poirot briskly we will go. I should like toask a few questions of the parlourmaidDorcas her name is is it notWe passed through Alfred Inglethorps room and Poirot delayed longenough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. Wewent out through that door locking both it and that of Mrs.Inglethorps room as before.I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to seeand went myself in search of Dorcas.When I returned with her however the boudoir was empty.Poirot I cried where are youI am here my friend.He had stepped outside the French window and was standing apparentlylost in admiration before the various shaped flower beds.Admirable he murmured. Admirable What symmetry Observe thatcrescent and those diamondstheir neatness rejoices the eye. Thespacing of the plants also is perfect. It has been recently done isit not soYes I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come inDorcasis here.Eh bien eh bien Do not grudge me a moments satisfaction of theeye.Yes but this affair is more important.And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equalimportanceI shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if hechose to take that line.You do not agree But such things have been. Well we will come in andinterview the brave Dorcas.Dorcas was standing in the boudoir her hands folded in front of herand her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was thevery model and picture of a good oldfashioned servant.In her attitude towards Poirot she was inclined to be suspicious buthe soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.Pray be seated mademoiselle.Thank you sir.You have been with your mistress many years is it not soTen years sir.That is a long time and very faithful service. You were much attachedto her were you notShe was a very good mistress to me sir.Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them toyou with Mr. Cavendishs full approval.Oh certainly sir.Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterdayafternoon. Your mistress had a quarrelYes sir. But I dont know that I ought Dorcas hesitated.Poirot looked at her keenly.My good Dorcas it is necessary that I should know every detail ofthat quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betrayingyour mistresss secrets. Your mistress lies dead and it is necessarythat we should know allif we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring herback to life but we do hope if there has been foul play to bring themurderer to justice.Amen to that said Dorcas fiercely. And naming no names theresone in this house that none of us could ever abide And an ill day itwas when first he darkened the threshold.Poirot waited for her indignation to subside and then resuming hisbusinesslike tone he askedNow as to this quarrel What is the first you heard of itWell sir I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterdayWhat time was thatI couldnt say exactly sir but it wasnt teatime by a long way.Perhaps four oclockor it may have been a bit later. Well sir as Isaid I happened to be passing along when I heard voices very loud andangry in here. I didnt exactly mean to listen butwell there it is.I stopped. The door was shut but the mistress was speaking very sharpand clear and I heard what she said quite plainly. You have lied tome and deceived me she said. I didnt hear what Mr. Inglethorpreplied. He spoke a good bit lower than she didbut she answered Howdare you I have kept you and clothed you and fed you You oweeverything to me And this is how you repay me By bringing disgraceupon our name Again I didnt hear what he said but she went onNothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my dutyclearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear ofpublicity or scandal between husband and wife will deter me. Then Ithought I heard them coming out so I went off quickly.You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorps voice you heardOh yes sir whose elses could it beWell what happened nextLater I came back to the hall but it was all quiet. At five oclockMrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup ofteanothing to eatto the boudoir. She was looking dreadfulso whiteand upset. Dorcas she says Ive had a great shock. Im sorry forthat mm I says. Youll feel better after a nice hot cup of teamm. She had something in her hand. I dont know if it was a letteror just a piece of paper but it had writing on it and she keptstaring at it almost as if she couldnt believe what was writtenthere. She whispered to herself as though she had forgotten I wasthere These few wordsand everythings changed. And then she says tome Never trust a man Dorcas theyre not worth it I hurried offand got her a good strong cup of tea and she thanked me and saidshed feel better when shed drunk it. I dont know what to do shesays. Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing Dorcas.Id rather hush it up if I could. Mrs. Cavendish came in just then soshe didnt say any more.She still had the letter or whatever it was in her handYes sir.What would she be likely to do with it afterwardsWell I dont know sir I expect she would lock it up in that purplecase of hers.Is that where she usually kept important papersYes sir. She brought it down with her every morning and took it upevery night.When did she lose the key of itShe missed it yesterday at lunchtime sir and told me to lookcarefully for it. She was very much put out about it.But she had a duplicate keyOh yes sir.Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and to tell the truth so wasI. What was all this about a lost key Poirot smiled.Never mind Dorcas it is my business to know things. Is this the keythat was lost He drew from his pocket the key that he had found inthe lock of the despatchcase upstairs.Dorcass eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.Thats it sir right enough. But where did you find it I lookedeverywhere for it.Ah but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it wastoday. Now to pass to another subject had your mistress a dark greendress in her wardrobeDorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.No sir.Are you quite sureOh yes sir.Has anyone else in the house got a green dressDorcas reflected.Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.Light or dark greenA light green sir a sort of chiffon they call it.Ah that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything greenNo sirnot that I know of.Poirots face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed orotherwise. He merely remarkedGood we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believethat your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last nightNot last night sir I know she didnt.Why do you know so positivelyBecause the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago and shedidnt have any more made up.You are quite sure of thatPositive sir.Then that is cleared up By the way your mistress didnt ask you tosign any paper yesterdayTo sign a paper No sir.When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening theyfound your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me noidea to whom these letters were addressedIm afraid I couldnt sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Anniecould tell you though shes a careless girl. Never cleared thecoffeecups away last night. Thats what happens when Im not here tolook after things.Poirot lifted his hand.Since they have been left Dorcas leave them a little longer I prayyou. I should like to examine them.Very well sir.What time did you go out last eveningAbout six oclock sir.Thank you Dorcas that is all I have to ask you. He rose andstrolled to the window. I have been admiring these flower beds. Howmany gardeners are employed here by the wayOnly three now sir. Five we had before the war when it was kept asa gentlemans place should be. I wish you could have seen it then sir.A fair sight it was. But now theres only old Manning and youngWilliam and a newfashioned woman gardener in breeches and suchlike.Ah these are dreadful timesThe good times will come again Dorcas. At least we hope so. Nowwill you send Annie to me hereYes sir. Thank you sir.How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders I askedin lively curiosity as Dorcas left the room. And about the lost keyand the duplicateOne thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders I knew by this. Hesuddenly produced a small cardboard box such as chemists use forpowders.Where did you find itIn the washstand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorps bedroom. It was NumberSix of my catalogue.But I suppose as the last powder was taken two days ago it is not ofmuch importanceProbably not but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiarabout this boxI examined it closely.No I cant say that I do.Look at the label.I read the label carefully One powder to be taken at bedtime ifrequired. Mrs. Inglethorp. No I see nothing unusual.Not the fact that there is no chemists nameAh I exclaimed. To be sure that is oddHave you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that without hisprinted nameNo I cant say that I have.I was becoming quite excited but Poirot damped my ardour by remarkingYet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself myfriend.An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie so I had no timeto reply.Annie was a fine strapping girl and was evidently labouring underintense excitement mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of thetragedy.Poirot came to the point at once with a businesslike briskness.I sent for you Annie because I thought you might be able to tell mesomething about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How manywere there And can you tell me any of the names and addressesAnnie considered.There were four letters sir. One was to Miss Howard and one was toMr. Wells the lawyer and the other two I dont think I remembersiroh yes one was to Rosss the caterers in Tadminster. The otherone I dont remember.Think urged Poirot.Annie racked her brains in vain.Im sorry sir but its clean gone. I dont think I can have noticedit.It does not matter said Poirot not betraying any sign ofdisappointment. Now I want to ask you about something else. There is asaucepan in Mrs. Inglethorps room with some cocoa in it. Did she havethat every nightYes sir it was put in her room every evening and she warmed it upin the nightwhenever she fancied it.What was it Plain cocoaYes sir made with milk with a teaspoonful of sugar and twoteaspoonfuls of rum in it.Who took it to her roomI did sir.AlwaysYes sir.At what timeWhen I went to draw the curtains as a rule sir.Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen thenNo sir you see theres not much room on the gas stove so cook usedto make it early before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then Iused to bring it up and put it on the table by the swing door andtake it into her room later.The swing door is in the left wing is it notYes sir.And the table is it on this side of the door or on thefartherservants sideIts this side sir.What time did you bring it up last nightAbout quarterpast seven I should say sir.And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorps roomWhen I went to shut up sir. About eight oclock. Mrs. Inglethorp cameup to bed before Id finished.Then between sevenfifteen and eight oclock the cocoa was standingon the table in the left wingYes sir. Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face andnow she blurted out unexpectedlyAnd if there was salt in it sir it wasnt me. I never took thesalt near it.What makes you think there was salt in it asked Poirot.Seeing it on the tray sir.You saw some salt on the trayYes. Coarse kitchen salt it looked. I never noticed it when I tookthe tray up but when I came to take it into the mistresss room I sawit at once and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again andasked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry because Dorcas wasout and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right and the salthad only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron and tookit in.I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown toherself Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. Howshe would have gaped if she had realized that her coarse kitchen saltwas strychnine one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. Imarvelled at Poirots calm. His selfcontrol was astonishing. I awaitedhis next question with impatience but it disappointed me.When you went into Mrs. Inglethorps room was the door leading intoMiss Cynthias room boltedOh Yes sir it always was. It had never been opened.And the door into Mr. Inglethorps room Did you notice if that wasbolted tooAnnie hesitated.I couldnt rightly say sir it was shut but I couldnt say whether itwas bolted or not.When you finally left the room did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the doorafter youNo sir not then but I expect she did later. She usually did lock itat night. The door into the passage that is.Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the roomyesterdayCandle grease Oh no sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didnt have a candle onlya readinglamp.Then if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the flooryou think you would have been sure to have seen itYes sir and I would have taken it out with a piece of blottingpaperand a hot iron.Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to DorcasDid your mistress ever have a green dressNo sir.Nor a mantle nor a cape nor ahow do you call ita sports coatNot green sir.Nor anyone else in the houseAnnie reflected.No sir.You are sure of thatQuite sure.Bien That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.With a nervous giggle Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.My pentup excitement burst forth.Poirot I cried I congratulate you This is a great discovery.What is a great discoveryWhy that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. Thatexplains everything Of course it did not take effect until the earlymorning since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.So you think that the cocoamark well what I say Hastings thecocoacontained strychnineOf course That salt on the tray what else could it have beenIt might have been salt replied Poirot placidly.I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that wayit was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind not for thefirst time that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thoughtit lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptivetype of mind.Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.You are not pleased with me mon amiMy dear Poirot I said coldly it is not for me to dictate to you.You have a right to your own opinion just as I have to mine.A most admirable sentiment remarked Poirot rising briskly to hisfeet. Now I have finished with this room. By the way whose is thesmaller desk in the cornerMr. Inglethorps.Ah He tried the roll top tentatively. Locked. But perhaps one ofMrs. Inglethorps keys would open it. He tried several twisting andturning them with a practiced hand and finally uttering an ejaculationof satisfaction. Voilà It is not the key but it will open it at apinch. He slid back the roll top and ran a rapid eye over the neatlyfiled papers. To my surprise he did not examine them merely remarkingapprovingly as he relocked the desk Decidedly he is a man of methodthis Mr. InglethorpA man of method was in Poirots estimation the highest praise thatcould be bestowed on any individual.I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled ondisconnectedlyThere were no stamps in his desk but there might have been eh monami There might have been Yeshis eyes wandered round theroomthis boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.Only this.He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket and tossed it over tome. It was rather a curious document. A plain dirty looking oldenvelope with a few words scrawled across it apparently at random. Thefollowing is a facsimile of it.IllustrationCHAPTER V.IT ISNT STRYCHNINE IS ITWhere did you find this I asked Poirot in lively curiosity.In the wastepaper basket. You recognise the handwritingYes it is Mrs. Inglethorps. But what does it meanPoirot shrugged his shoulders.I cannot saybut it is suggestive.A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorpsmind was deranged Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacalpossession And if that were so was it not also possible that shemight have taken her own lifeI was about to expound these theories to Poirot when his own wordsdistracted me.Come he said now to examine the coffeecupsMy dear Poirot What on earth is the good of that now that we knowabout the cocoaOh là là That miserable cocoa cried Poirot flippantly.He laughed with apparent enjoyment raising his arms to heaven in mockdespair in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.And anyway I said with increasing coldness as Mrs. Inglethorptook her coffee upstairs with her I do not see what you expect tofind unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet ofstrychnine on the coffee trayPoirot was sobered at once.Come come my friend he said slipping his arms through mine. Nevous fâchez pas Allow me to interest myself in my coffeecups and Iwill respect your cocoa. There Is it a bargainHe was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh and we wenttogether to the drawingroom where the coffeecups and tray remainedundisturbed as we had left them.Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before listeningvery carefully and verifying the position of the various cups.So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the trayand poured out. Yes. Then she cameacross to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Hereare the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece half drunk thatwould be Mr. Lawrence Cavendishs. And the one on the trayJohn Cavendishs. I saw him put it down there.Good. One two three four fivebut where then is the cup of Mr.InglethorpHe does not take coffee.Then all are accounted for. One moment my friend.With infinite care he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cupsealing them up in separate test tubes tasting each in turn as he didso. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gatheredthere that I can only describe as half puzzled and half relieved.Bien he said at last. It is evident I had an ideabut clearly Iwas mistaken. Yes altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But nomatterAnd with a characteristic shrug he dismissed whatever it was that wasworrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginningthat this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blindalley but I restrained my tongue. After all though he was old Poirothad been a great man in his day.Breakfast is ready said John Cavendish coming in from the hall.You will breakfast with us Monsieur PoirotPoirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored tohis normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upsethim temporarily but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.He was a man of very little imagination in sharp contrast with hisbrother who had perhaps too much.Ever since the early hours of the morning John had been hard at worksending telegramsone of the first had gone to Evelyn Howardwritingnotices for the papers and generally occupying himself with themelancholy duties that a death entails.May I ask how things are proceeding he said. Do your investigationspoint to my mother having died a natural deathoror must we prepareourselves for the worstI think Mr. Cavendish said Poirot gravely that you would do wellnot to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the viewsof the other members of the familyMy brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss overnothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case ofheart failure.He does does he That is very interestingvery interesting murmuredPoirot softly. And Mrs. CavendishA faint cloud passed over Johns face.I have not the least idea what my wifes views on the subject are.The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke therather awkward silence by saying with a slight effortI told you didnt I that Mr. Inglethorp has returnedPoirot bent his head.Its an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat himas usualbut hang it all ones gorge does rise at sitting down to eatwith a possible murdererPoirot nodded sympathetically.I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you Mr.Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorpsreason for not returning last night was I believe that he hadforgotten the latchkey. Is not that soYes.I suppose you are quite sure that the latchkey was forgottenthathe did not take it after allI have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in thehall drawer. Ill go and see if its there now.Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.No no Mr. Cavendish it is too late now. I am certain that you wouldfind it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it he has had ample time toreplace it by now.But do you thinkI think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before hisreturn and seen it there it would have been a valuable point in hisfavour. That is all.John looked perplexed.Do not worry said Poirot smoothly. I assure you that you need notlet it trouble you. Since you are so kind let us go and have somebreakfast.Everyone was assembled in the diningroom. Under the circumstances wewere naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock isalways trying and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum andgood breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much asusual yet I could not help wondering if this selfcontrol were reallya matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes no signs ofsecretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion thatDorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of thetragedy.I pass over Alfred Inglethorp who acted the bereaved widower in amanner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know thatwe suspected him I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of thefact conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fearor was he confident that his crime would go unpunished Surely thesuspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a markedman.But did everyone suspect him What about Mrs. Cavendish I watched heras she sat at the head of the table graceful composed enigmatic. Inher soft grey frock with white ruffles at the wrists falling over herslender hands she looked very beautiful. When she chose however herface could be sphinxlike in its inscrutability. She was very silenthardly opening her lips and yet in some queer way I felt that thegreat strength of her personality was dominating us all.And little Cynthia Did she suspect She looked very tired and ill Ithought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. Iasked her if she were feeling ill and she answered franklyYes Ive got the most beastly headache.Have another cup of coffee mademoiselle said Poirot solicitously.It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the mal de tête. Hejumped up and took her cup.No sugar said Cynthia watching him as he picked up thesugartongs.No sugar You abandon it in the wartime ehNo I never take it in coffee.Sacré murmured Poirot to himself as he brought back thereplenished cup.Only I heard him and glancing up curiously at the little man I sawthat his face was working with suppressed excitement and his eyes wereas green as a cats. He had heard or seen something that had affectedhim stronglybut what was it I do not usually label myself as densebut I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted myattention.In another moment the door opened and Dorcas appeared.Mr. Wells to see you sir she said to John.I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.Inglethorp had written the night before.John rose immediately.Show him into my study. Then he turned to us. My mothers lawyerhe explained. And in a lower voice He is also Coroneryou understand.Perhaps you would like to come with meWe acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on aheadand I took the opportunity of whispering to PoirotThere will be an inquest thenPoirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought so much so thatmy curiosity was aroused.What is it You are not attending to what I say.It is true my friend. I am much worried.WhyBecause Mademoiselle Cynthia does not take sugar in her coffee.What You cannot be seriousBut I am most serious. Ah there is something there that I do notunderstand. My instinct was right.What instinctThe instinct that led me to insist on examining those coffeecups.Chut no more nowWe followed John into his study and he closed the door behind us.Mr. Wells was a pleasant man of middleage with keen eyes and thetypical lawyers mouth. John introduced us both and explained thereason of our presence.You will understand Wells he added that this is all strictlyprivate. We are still hoping that there will turn out to be no need forinvestigation of any kind.Quite so quite so said Mr. Wells soothingly. I wish we could havespared you the pain and publicity of an inquest but of course itsquite unavoidable in the absence of a doctors certificate.Yes I suppose so.Clever man Bauerstein. Great authority on toxicology I believe.Indeed said John with a certain stiffness in his manner. Then headded rather hesitatingly Shall we have to appear as witnessesall ofus I meanYou of courseand aherMr.erInglethorp.A slight pause ensued before the lawyer went on in his soothing mannerAny other evidence will be simply confirmatory a mere matter ofform.I see.A faint expression of relief swept over Johns face. It puzzled me forI saw no occasion for it.If you know of nothing to the contrary pursued Mr. Wells I hadthought of Friday. That will give us plenty of time for the doctorsreport. The postmortem is to take place tonight I believeYes.Then that arrangement will suit youPerfectly.I need not tell you my dear Cavendish how distressed I am at thismost tragic affair.Can you give us no help in solving it monsieur interposed Poirotspeaking for the first time since we had entered the room.IYes we heard that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote to you last night. You shouldhave received the letter this morning.I did but it contains no information. It is merely a note asking meto call upon her this morning as she wanted my advice on a matter ofgreat importance.She gave you no hint as to what that matter might beUnfortunately no.That is a pity said John.A great pity agreed Poirot gravely.There was silence. Poirot remained lost in thought for a few minutes.Finally he turned to the lawyer again.Mr. Wells there is one thing I should like to ask youthat is if itis not against professional etiquette. In the event of Mrs.Inglethorps death who would inherit her moneyThe lawyer hesitated a moment and then repliedThe knowledge will be public property very soon so if Mr. Cavendishdoes not objectNot at all interpolated John.I do not see any reason why I should not answer your question. By herlast will dated August of last year after various unimportantlegacies to servants etc. she gave her entire fortune to her stepsonMr. John Cavendish.Was not thatpardon the question Mr. Cavendishrather unfair to herother stepson Mr. Lawrence CavendishNo I do not think so. You see under the terms of their fatherswill while John inherited the property Lawrence at his stepmothersdeath would come into a considerable sum of money. Mrs. Inglethorpleft her money to her elder stepson knowing that he would have to keepup Styles. It was to my mind a very fair and equitable distribution.Poirot nodded thoughtfully.I see. But I am right in saying am I not that by your English lawthat will was automatically revoked when Mrs. Inglethorp remarriedMr. Wells bowed his head.As I was about to proceed Monsieur Poirot that document is now nulland void.Hein said Poirot. He reflected for a moment and then asked WasMrs. Inglethorp herself aware of that factI do not know. She may have been.She was said John unexpectedly. We were discussing the matter ofwills being revoked by marriage only yesterday.Ah One more question Mr. Wells. You say her last will. Had Mrs.Inglethorp then made several former willsOn an average she made a new will at least once a year said Mr.Wells imperturbably. She was given to changing her mind as to hertestamentary dispositions now benefiting one now another member ofher family.Suppose suggested Poirot that unknown to you she had made a newwill in favour of someone who was not in any sense of the word amember of the familywe will say Miss Howard for instancewould you besurprisedNot in the least.Ah Poirot seemed to have exhausted his questions.I drew close to him while John and the lawyer were debating thequestion of going through Mrs. Inglethorps papers.Do you think Mrs. Inglethorp made a will leaving all her money to MissHoward I asked in a low voice with some curiosity.Poirot smiled.No.Then why did you askHushJohn Cavendish had turned to Poirot.Will you come with us Monsieur Poirot We are going through mymothers papers. Mr. Inglethorp is quite willing to leave it entirelyto Mr. Wells and myself.Which simplifies matters very much murmured the lawyer. Astechnically of course he was entitled He did not finish thesentence.We will look through the desk in the boudoir first explained Johnand go up to her bedroom afterwards. She kept her most importantpapers in a purple despatchcase which we must look throughcarefully.Yes said the lawyer it is quite possible that there may be a laterwill than the one in my possession.There is a later will. It was Poirot who spoke.What John and the lawyer looked at him startled.Or rather pursued my friend imperturbably there was one.What do you meanthere was one Where is it nowBurntBurntYes. See here. He took out the charred fragment we had found in thegrate in Mrs. Inglethorps room and handed it to the lawyer with abrief explanation of when and where he had found it.But possibly this is an old willI do not think so. In fact I am almost certain that it was made noearlier than yesterday afternoon.What Impossible broke simultaneously from both men.Poirot turned to John.If you will allow me to send for your gardener I will prove it toyou.Oh of coursebut I dont seePoirot raised his hand.Do as I ask you. Afterwards you shall question as much as you please.Very well. He rang the bell.Dorcas answered it in due course.Dorcas will you tell Manning to come round and speak to me here.Yes sir.Dorcas withdrew.We waited in a tense silence. Poirot alone seemed perfectly at hisease and dusted a forgotten corner of the bookcase.The clumping of hobnailed boots on the gravel outside proclaimed theapproach of Manning. John looked questioningly at Poirot. The latternodded.Come inside Manning said John I want to speak to you.Manning came slowly and hesitatingly through the French window andstood as near it as he could. He held his cap in his hands twisting itvery carefully round and round. His back was much bent though he wasprobably not as old as he looked but his eyes were sharp andintelligent and belied his slow and rather cautious speech.Manning said John this gentleman will put some questions to youwhich I want you to answer.Yessir mumbled Manning.Poirot stepped forward briskly. Mannings eye swept over him with afaint contempt.You were planting a bed of begonias round by the south side of thehouse yesterday afternoon were you not ManningYes sir me and Willum.And Mrs. Inglethorp came to the window and called you did she notYes sir she did.Tell me in your own words exactly what happened after that.Well sir nothing much. She just told Willum to go on his bicycledown to the village and bring back a form of will or suchlikeIdont know what exactlyshe wrote it down for him.WellWell he did sir.And what happened nextWe went on with the begonias sir.Did not Mrs. Inglethorp call you againYes sir both me and Willum she called.And thenShe made us come right in and sign our names at the bottom of a longpaperunder where shed signed.Did you see anything of what was written above her signature askedPoirot sharply.No sir there was a bit of blotting paper over that part.And you signed where she told youYes sir first me and then Willum.What did she do with it afterwardsWell sir she slipped it into a long envelope and put it inside asort of purple box that was standing on the desk.What time was it when she first called youAbout four I should say sir.Not earlier Couldnt it have been about halfpast threeNo I shouldnt say so sir. It would be more likely to be a bit afterfournot before it.Thank you Manning that will do said Poirot pleasantly.The gardener glanced at his master who nodded whereupon Manninglifted a finger to his forehead with a low mumble and backedcautiously out of the window.We all looked at each other.Good heavens murmured John. What an extraordinary coincidence.Howa coincidenceThat my mother should have made a will on the very day of her deathMr. Wells cleared his throat and remarked drilyAre you so sure it is a coincidence CavendishWhat do you meanYour mother you tell me had a violent quarrel withsomeone yesterdayafternoonWhat do you mean cried John again. There was a tremor in his voiceand he had gone very pale.In consequence of that quarrel your mother very suddenly andhurriedly makes a new will. The contents of that will we shall neverknow. She told no one of its provisions. This morning no doubt shewould have consulted me on the subjectbut she had no chance. The willdisappears and she takes its secret with her to her grave. CavendishI much fear there is no coincidence there. Monsieur Poirot I am sureyou agree with me that the facts are very suggestive.Suggestive or not interrupted John we are most grateful toMonsieur Poirot for elucidating the matter. But for him we shouldnever have known of this will. I suppose I may not ask you monsieurwhat first led you to suspect the factPoirot smiled and answeredA scribbled over old envelope and a freshly planted bed of begonias.John I think would have pressed his questions further but at thatmoment the loud purr of a motor was audible and we all turned to thewindow as it swept past.Evie cried John. Excuse me Wells. He went hurriedly out into thehall.Poirot looked inquiringly at me.Miss Howard I explained.Ah I am glad she has come. There is a woman with a head and a hearttoo Hastings. Though the good God gave her no beautyI followed Johns example and went out into the hall where MissHoward was endeavouring to extricate herself from the voluminous massof veils that enveloped her head. As her eyes fell on me a sudden pangof guilt shot through me. This was the woman who had warned me soearnestly and to whose warning I had alas paid no heed How soonand how contemptuously I had dismissed it from my mind. Now that shehad been proved justified in so tragic a manner I felt ashamed. Shehad known Alfred Inglethorp only too well. I wondered whether if shehad remained at Styles the tragedy would have taken place or wouldthe man have feared her watchful eyesI was relieved when she shook me by the hand with her well rememberedpainful grip. The eyes that met mine were sad but not reproachfulthat she had been crying bitterly I could tell by the redness of hereyelids but her manner was unchanged from its old gruffness.Started the moment I got the wire. Just come off night duty. Hiredcar. Quickest way to get here.Have you had anything to eat this morning Evie asked John.No.I thought not. Come along breakfasts not cleared away yet andtheyll make you some fresh tea. He turned to me. Look after herHastings will you Wells is waiting for me. Oh heres MonsieurPoirot. Hes helping us you know Evie.Miss Howard shook hands with Poirot but glanced suspiciously over hershoulder at John.What do you meanhelping usHelping us to investigate.Nothing to investigate. Have they taken him to prison yetTaken who to prisonWho Alfred Inglethorp of courseMy dear Evie do be careful. Lawrence is of the opinion that my motherdied from heart seizure.More fool Lawrence retorted Miss Howard. Of course AlfredInglethorp murdered poor Emilyas I always told you he would.My dear Evie dont shout so. Whatever we may think or suspect it isbetter to say as little as possible for the present. The inquest isntuntil Friday.Not until fiddlesticks The snort Miss Howard gave was trulymagnificent. Youre all off your heads. The man will be out of thecountry by then. If hes any sense he wont stay here tamely and waitto be hanged.John Cavendish looked at her helplessly.I know what it is she accused him youve been listening to thedoctors. Never should. What do they know Nothing at allor just enoughto make them dangerous. I ought to knowmy own father was a doctor.That little Wilkins is about the greatest fool that even I have everseen. Heart seizure Sort of thing he would say. Anyone with any sensecould see at once that her husband had poisoned her. I always said hedmurder her in her bed poor soul. Now hes done it. And all you can dois to murmur silly things about heart seizure and inquest onFriday. You ought to be ashamed of yourself John Cavendish.What do you want me to do asked John unable to help a faint smile.Dash it all Evie I cant haul him down to the local police stationby the scruff of his neck.Well you might do something. Find out how he did it. Hes a craftybeggar. Dare say he soaked fly papers. Ask cook if shes missed any.It occurred to me very forcibly at that moment that to harbour MissHoward and Alfred Inglethorp under the same roof and keep the peacebetween them was likely to prove a Herculean task and I did not envyJohn. I could see by the expression of his face that he fullyappreciated the difficulty of the position. For the moment he soughtrefuge in retreat and left the room precipitately.Dorcas brought in fresh tea. As she left the room Poirot came overfrom the window where he had been standing and sat down facing MissHoward.Mademoiselle he said gravely I want to ask you something.Ask away said the lady eyeing him with some disfavour.I want to be able to count upon your help.Ill help you to hang Alfred with pleasure she replied gruffly.Hangings too good for him. Ought to be drawn and quartered like ingood old times.We are at one then said Poirot for I too want to hang thecriminal.Alfred InglethorpHim or another.No question of another. Poor Emily was never murdered until he camealong. I dont say she wasnt surrounded by sharksshe was. But it wasonly her purse they were after. Her life was safe enough. But alongcomes Mr. Alfred Inglethorpand within two monthshey prestoBelieve me Miss Howard said Poirot very earnestly if Mr.Inglethorp is the man he shall not escape me. On my honour I willhang him as high as HamanThats better said Miss Howard more enthusiastically.But I must ask you to trust me. Now your help may be very valuable tome. I will tell you why. Because in all this house of mourning yoursare the only eyes that have wept.Miss Howard blinked and a new note crept into the gruffness of hervoice.If you mean that I was fond of heryes I was. You know Emily was aselfish old woman in her way. She was very generous but she alwayswanted a return. She never let people forget what she had done forthemand that way she missed love. Dont think she ever realized itthough or felt the lack of it. Hope not anyway. I was on a differentfooting. I took my stand from the first. So many pounds a year Imworth to you. Well and good. But not a penny piece besidesnot a pairof gloves nor a theatre ticket. She didnt understandwas veryoffended sometimes. Said I was foolishly proud. It wasnt thatbut Icouldnt explain. Anyway I kept my selfrespect. And so out of thewhole bunch I was the only one who could allow myself to be fond ofher. I watched over her. I guarded her from the lot of them and then aglibtongued scoundrel comes along and pooh all my years of devotiongo for nothing.Poirot nodded sympathetically.I understand mademoiselle I understand all you feel. It is mostnatural. You think that we are lukewarmthat we lack fire andenergybut trust me it is not so.John stuck his head in at this juncture and invited us both to come upto Mrs. Inglethorps room as he and Mr. Wells had finished lookingthrough the desk in the boudoir.As we went up the stairs John looked back to the diningroom door andlowered his voice confidentiallyLook here whats going to happen when these two meetI shook my head helplessly.Ive told Mary to keep them apart if she can.Will she be able to do soThe Lord only knows. Theres one thing Inglethorp himself wont betoo keen on meeting her.Youve got the keys still havent you Poirot I asked as wereached the door of the locked room.Taking the keys from Poirot John unlocked it and we all passed in.The lawyer went straight to the desk and John followed him.My mother kept most of her important papers in this despatchcase Ibelieve he said.Poirot drew out the small bunch of keys.Permit me. I locked it out of precaution this morning.But its not locked now.ImpossibleSee. And John lifted the lid as he spoke.Milles tonnerres cried Poirot dumbfounded. And Iwho have boththe keys in my pocket He flung himself upon the case. Suddenly hestiffened. Eh voilà une affaire This lock has been forced.WhatPoirot laid down the case again.But who forced it Why should they When But the door was lockedThese exclamations burst from us disjointedly.Poirot answered them categoricallyalmost mechanically.Who That is the question. Why Ah if I only knew. When Since I washere an hour ago. As to the door being locked it is a very ordinarylock. Probably any other of the doorkeys in this passage would fit it.We stared at one another blankly. Poirot had walked over to themantelpiece. He was outwardly calm but I noticed his hands which fromlong force of habit were mechanically straightening the spill vases onthe mantelpiece were shaking violently.See here it was like this he said at last. There was something inthat casesome piece of evidence slight in itself perhaps but stillenough of a clue to connect the murderer with the crime. It was vitalto him that it should be destroyed before it was discovered and itssignificance appreciated. Therefore he took the risk the great riskof coming in here. Finding the case locked he was obliged to force itthus betraying his presence. For him to take that risk it must havebeen something of great importance.But what was itAh cried Poirot with a gesture of anger. That I do not know Adocument of some kind without doubt possibly the scrap of paperDorcas saw in her hand yesterday afternoon. And I his anger burstforth freelymiserable animal that I am I guessed nothing I havebehaved like an imbecile I should never have left that case here. Ishould have carried it away with me. Ah triple pig And now it isgone. It is destroyedbut is it destroyed Is there not yet a chancewemust leave no stone unturnedHe rushed like a madman from the room and I followed him as soon as Ihad sufficiently recovered my wits. But by the time I had reached thetop of the stairs he was out of sight.Mary Cavendish was standing where the staircase branched staring downinto the hall in the direction in which he had disappeared.What has happened to your extraordinary little friend Mr. HastingsHe has just rushed past me like a mad bull.Hes rather upset about something I remarked feebly. I really didnot know how much Poirot would wish me to disclose. As I saw a faintsmile gather on Mrs. Cavendishs expressive mouth I endeavoured to tryand turn the conversation by saying They havent met yet have theyWhoMr. Inglethorp and Miss Howard.She looked at me in rather a disconcerting manner.Do you think it would be such a disaster if they did meetWell dont you I said rather taken aback.No. She was smiling in her quiet way. I should like to see a goodflare up. It would clear the air. At present we are all thinking somuch and saying so little.John doesnt think so I remarked. Hes anxious to keep them apart.Oh JohnSomething in her tone fired me and I blurted outOld Johns an awfully good sort.She studied me curiously for a minute or two and then said to mygreat surpriseYou are loyal to your friend. I like you for that.Arent you my friend tooI am a very bad friend.Why do you say thatBecause it is true. I am charming to my friends one day and forgetall about them the next.I dont know what impelled me but I was nettled and I said foolishlyand not in the best of tasteYet you seem to be invariably charming to Dr. BauersteinInstantly I regretted my words. Her face stiffened. I had theimpression of a steel curtain coming down and blotting out the realwoman. Without a word she turned and went swiftly up the stairswhilst I stood like an idiot gaping after her.I was recalled to other matters by a frightful row going on below. Icould hear Poirot shouting and expounding. I was vexed to think that mydiplomacy had been in vain. The little man appeared to be taking thewhole house into his confidence a proceeding of which I for onedoubted the wisdom. Once again I could not help regretting that myfriend was so prone to lose his head in moments of excitement. Istepped briskly down the stairs. The sight of me calmed Poirot almostimmediately. I drew him aside.My dear fellow I said is this wise Surely you dont want thewhole house to know of this occurrence You are actually playing intothe criminals hands.You think so HastingsI am sure of it.Well well my friend I will be guided by you.Good. Although unfortunately it is a little too late now.Sure.He looked so crestfallen and abashed that I felt quite sorry though Istill thought my rebuke a just and wise one.Well he said at last let us go mon ami.You have finished hereFor the moment yes. You will walk back with me to the villageWillingly.He picked up his little suitcase and we went out through the openwindow in the drawingroom. Cynthia Murdoch was just coming in andPoirot stood aside to let her pass.Excuse me mademoiselle one minute.Yes she turned inquiringly.Did you ever make up Mrs. Inglethorps medicinesA slight flush rose in her face as she answered rather constrainedlyNo.Only her powdersThe flush deepened as Cynthia repliedOh yes I did make up some sleeping powders for her once.ThesePoirot produced the empty box which had contained powders.She nodded.Can you tell me what they were Sulphonal VeronalNo they were bromide powders.Ah Thank you mademoiselle good morning.As we walked briskly away from the house I glanced at him more thanonce. I had often before noticed that if anything excited him hiseyes turned green like a cats. They were shining like emeralds now.My friend he broke out at last I have a little idea a verystrange and probably utterly impossible idea. And yetit fits in.I shrugged my shoulders. I privately thought that Poirot was rather toomuch given to these fantastic ideas. In this case surely the truthwas only too plain and apparent.So that is the explanation of the blank label on the box I remarked.Very simple as you said. I really wonder that I did not think of itmyself.Poirot did not appear to be listening to me.They have made one more discovery làbas he observed jerking histhumb over his shoulder in the direction of Styles. Mr. Wells told meas we were going upstairs.What was itLocked up in the desk in the boudoir they found a will of Mrs.Inglethorps dated before her marriage leaving her fortune to AlfredInglethorp. It must have been made just at the time they were engaged.It came quite as a surprise to Wellsand to John Cavendish also. It waswritten on one of those printed will forms and witnessed by two of theservantsnot Dorcas.Did Mr. Inglethorp know of itHe says not.One might take that with a grain of salt I remarked sceptically.All these wills are very confusing. Tell me how did those scribbledwords on the envelope help you to discover that a will was madeyesterday afternoonPoirot smiled.Mon ami have you ever when writing a letter been arrested by thefact that you did not know how to spell a certain wordYes often. I suppose everyone has.Exactly. And have you not in such a case tried the word once ortwice on the edge of the blottingpaper or a spare scrap of paper tosee if it looked right Well that is what Mrs. Inglethorp did. Youwill notice that the word possessed is spelt first with one s andsubsequently with twocorrectly. To make sure she had further tried itin a sentence thus I am possessed. Now what did that tell me Ittold me that Mrs. Inglethorp had been writing the word possessed thatafternoon and having the fragment of paper found in the grate freshin my mind the possibility of a willa document almost certain tocontain that wordoccurred to me at once. This possibility wasconfirmed by a further circumstance. In the general confusion theboudoir had not been swept that morning and near the desk were severaltraces of brown mould and earth. The weather had been perfectly finefor some days and no ordinary boots would have left such a heavydeposit.I strolled to the window and saw at once that the begonia beds hadbeen newly planted. The mould in the beds was exactly similar to thaton the floor of the boudoir and also I learnt from you that they hadbeen planted yesterday afternoon. I was now sure that one or possiblyboth of the gardenersfor there were two sets of footprints in thebedhad entered the boudoir for if Mrs. Inglethorp had merely wishedto speak to them she would in all probability have stood at the windowand they would not have come into the room at all. I was now quiteconvinced that she had made a fresh will and had called the twogardeners in to witness her signature. Events proved that I was rightin my supposition.That was very ingenious I could not help admitting. I must confessthat the conclusions I drew from those few scribbled words were quiteerroneous.He smiled.You gave too much rein to your imagination. Imagination is a goodservant and a bad master. The simplest explanation is always the mostlikely.Another pointhow did you know that the key of the despatchcase hadbeen lostI did not know it. It was a guess that turned out to be correct. Youobserved that it had a piece of twisted wire through the handle. Thatsuggested to me at once that it had possibly been wrenched off a flimsykeyring. Now if it had been lost and recovered Mrs. Inglethorp wouldat once have replaced it on her bunch but on her bunch I found whatwas obviously the duplicate key very new and bright which led me tothe hypothesis that somebody else had inserted the original key in thelock of the despatchcase.Yes I said Alfred Inglethorp without doubt.Poirot looked at me curiously.You are very sure of his guiltWell naturally. Every fresh circumstance seems to establish it moreclearly.On the contrary said Poirot quietly there are several points inhis favour.Oh come nowYes.I see only one.And thatThat he was not in the house last night.Bad shot as you English say You have chosen the one point that tomy mind tells against him.How is thatBecause if Mr. Inglethorp knew that his wife would be poisoned lastnight he would certainly have arranged to be away from the house. Hisexcuse was an obviously trumped up one. That leaves us twopossibilities either he knew what was going to happen or he had areason of his own for his absence.And that reason I asked sceptically.Poirot shrugged his shoulders.How should I know Discreditable without doubt. This Mr. InglethorpI should say is somewhat of a scoundrelbut that does not of necessitymake him a murderer.I shook my head unconvinced.We do not agree eh said Poirot. Well let us leave it. Time willshow which of us is right. Now let us turn to other aspects of thecase. What do you make of the fact that all the doors of the bedroomwere bolted on the insideWell I considered. One must look at it logically.True.I should put it this way. The doors were boltedour own eyes havetold us thatyet the presence of the candle grease on the floor andthe destruction of the will prove that during the night someoneentered the room. You agree so farPerfectly. Put with admirable clearness. Proceed.Well I said encouraged as the person who entered did not do so bythe window nor by miraculous means it follows that the door must havebeen opened from inside by Mrs. Inglethorp herself. That strengthensthe conviction that the person in question was her husband. She wouldnaturally open the door to her own husband.Poirot shook his head.Why should she She had bolted the door leading into his rooma mostunusual proceeding on her partshe had had a most violent quarrel withhim that very afternoon. No he was the last person she would admit.But you agree with me that the door must have been opened by Mrs.Inglethorp herselfThere is another possibility. She may have forgotten to bolt the doorinto the passage when she went to bed and have got up later towardsmorning and bolted it then.Poirot is that seriously your opinionNo I do not say it is so but it might be. Now to turn to anotherfeature what do you make of the scrap of conversation you overheardbetween Mrs. Cavendish and her motherinlawI had forgotten that I said thoughtfully. That is as enigmatical asever. It seems incredible that a woman like Mrs. Cavendish proud andreticent to the last degree should interfere so violently in what wascertainly not her affair.Precisely. It was an astonishing thing for a woman of her breeding todo.It is certainly curious I agreed. Still it is unimportant andneed not be taken into account.A groan burst from Poirot.What have I always told you Everything must be taken into account. Ifthe fact will not fit the theorylet the theory go.Well we shall see I said nettled.Yes we shall see.We had reached Leastways Cottage and Poirot ushered me upstairs to hisown room. He offered me one of the tiny Russian cigarettes he himselfoccasionally smoked. I was amused to notice that he stowed away theused matches most carefully in a little china pot. My momentaryannoyance vanished.Poirot had placed our two chairs in front of the open window whichcommanded a view of the village street. The fresh air blew in warm andpleasant. It was going to be a hot day.Suddenly my attention was arrested by a weedy looking young man rushingdown the street at a great pace. It was the expression on his face thatwas extraordinarya curious mingling of terror and agitation.Look Poirot I said.He leant forward.Tiens he said. It is Mr. Mace from the chemists shop. He iscoming here.The young man came to a halt before Leastways Cottage and afterhesitating a moment pounded vigorously at the door.A little minute cried Poirot from the window. I come.Motioning to me to follow him he ran swiftly down the stairs andopened the door. Mr. Mace began at once.Oh Mr. Poirot Im sorry for the inconvenience but I heard thatyoud just come back from the HallYes we have.The young man moistened his dry lips. His face was working curiously.Its all over the village about old Mrs. Inglethorp dying so suddenly.They do say he lowered his voice cautiouslythat its poisonPoirots face remained quite impassive.Only the doctors can tell us that Mr. Mace.Yes exactlyof course The young man hesitated and then hisagitation was too much for him. He clutched Poirot by the arm and sankhis voice to a whisper Just tell me this Mr. Poirot it isntitisnt strychnine is itI hardly heard what Poirot replied. Something evidently of anoncommittal nature. The young man departed and as he closed the doorPoirots eyes met mine.Yes he said nodding gravely. He will have evidence to give at theinquest.We went slowly upstairs again. I was opening my lips when Poirotstopped me with a gesture of his hand.Not now not now mon ami. I have need of reflection. My mind is insome disorderwhich is not well.For about ten minutes he sat in dead silence perfectly still exceptfor several expressive motions of his eyebrows and all the time hiseyes grew steadily greener. At last he heaved a deep sigh.It is well. The bad moment has passed. Now all is arranged andclassified. One must never permit confusion. The case is not clearyetno. For it is of the most complicated It puzzles me. MeHercule Poirot There are two facts of significance.And what are theyThe first is the state of the weather yesterday. That is veryimportant.But it was a glorious day I interrupted. Poirot youre pulling mylegNot at all. The thermometer registered degrees in the shade. Do notforget that my friend. It is the key to the whole riddleAnd the second point I asked.The important fact that Monsieur Inglethorp wears very peculiarclothes has a black beard and uses glasses.Poirot I cannot believe you are serious.I am absolutely serious my friend.But this is childishNo it is very momentous.And supposing the Coroners jury returns a verdict of Wilful Murderagainst Alfred Inglethorp. What becomes of your theories thenThey would not be shaken because twelve stupid men had happened tomake a mistake But that will not occur. For one thing a country juryis not anxious to take responsibility upon itself and Mr. Inglethorpstands practically in the position of local squire. Also he addedplacidly I should not allow itYou would not allow itNo.I looked at the extraordinary little man divided between annoyance andamusement. He was so tremendously sure of himself. As though he read mythoughts he nodded gently.Oh yes mon ami I would do what I say. He got up and laid hishand on my shoulder. His physiognomy underwent a complete change. Tearscame into his eyes. In all this you see I think of that poor Mrs.Inglethorp who is dead. She was not extravagantly lovedno. But she wasvery good to us BelgiansI owe her a debt.I endeavoured to interrupt but Poirot swept on.Let me tell you this Hastings. She would never forgive me if I letAlfred Inglethorp her husband be arrested nowwhen a word from mecould save himCHAPTER VI.THE INQUESTIn the interval before the inquest Poirot was unfailing in hisactivity. Twice he was closeted with Mr. Wells. He also took long walksinto the country. I rather resented his not taking me into hisconfidence the more so as I could not in the least guess what he wasdriving at.It occurred to me that he might have been making inquiries at Raikessfarm so finding him out when I called at Leastways Cottage onWednesday evening I walked over there by the fields hoping to meethim. But there was no sign of him and I hesitated to go right up tothe farm itself. As I walked away I met an aged rustic who leered atme cunningly.Youm from the Hall baint you he asked.Yes. Im looking for a friend of mine whom I thought might have walkedthis way.A little chap As waves his hands when he talks One of them Belgiesfrom the villageYes I said eagerly. He has been here thenOh ay hes been here right enough. Moren once too. Friend ofyours is he Ah you gentlemen from the Hallyoum a pretty lot Andhe leered more jocosely than ever.Why do the gentlemen from the Hall come here often I asked ascarelessly as I could.He winked at me knowingly.One does mister. Naming no names mind. And a very liberalgentleman too Oh thank you sir Im sure.I walked on sharply. Evelyn Howard had been right then and Iexperienced a sharp twinge of disgust as I thought of AlfredInglethorps liberality with another womans money. Had that piquantgipsy face been at the bottom of the crime or was it the basermainspring of money Probably a judicious mixture of both.On one point Poirot seemed to have a curious obsession. He once ortwice observed to me that he thought Dorcas must have made an error infixing the time of the quarrel. He suggested to her repeatedly that itwas fourthirty and not four oclock when she had heard the voices.But Dorcas was unshaken. Quite an hour or even more had elapsedbetween the time when she had heard the voices and five oclock whenshe had taken tea to her mistress.The inquest was held on Friday at the Stylites Arms in the village.Poirot and I sat together not being required to give evidence.The preliminaries were gone through. The jury viewed the body and JohnCavendish gave evidence of identification.Further questioned he described his awakening in the early hours ofthe morning and the circumstances of his mothers death.The medical evidence was next taken. There was a breathless hush andevery eye was fixed on the famous London specialist who was known tobe one of the greatest authorities of the day on the subject oftoxicology.In a few brief words he summed up the result of the postmortem. Shornof its medical phraseology and technicalities it amounted to the factthat Mrs. Inglethorp had met her death as the result of strychninepoisoning. Judging from the quantity recovered she must have taken notless than threequarters of a grain of strychnine but probably onegrain or slightly over.Is it possible that she could have swallowed the poison by accidentasked the Coroner.I should consider it very unlikely. Strychnine is not used fordomestic purposes as some poisons are and there are restrictionsplaced on its sale.Does anything in your examination lead you to determine how the poisonwas administeredNo.You arrived at Styles before Dr. Wilkins I believeThat is so. The motor met me just outside the lodge gates and Ihurried there as fast as I could.Will you relate to us exactly what happened nextI entered Mrs. Inglethorps room. She was at that moment in a typicaltetanic convulsion. She turned towards me and gasped outAlfredAlfredCould the strychnine have been administered in Mrs. Inglethorpsafterdinner coffee which was taken to her by her husbandPossibly but strychnine is a fairly rapid drug in its action. Thesymptoms appear from one to two hours after it has been swallowed. Itis retarded under certain conditions none of which however appear tohave been present in this case. I presume Mrs. Inglethorp took thecoffee after dinner about eight oclock whereas the symptoms did notmanifest themselves until the early hours of the morning which on theface of it points to the drug having been taken much later in theevening.Mrs. Inglethorp was in the habit of drinking a cup of cocoa in themiddle of the night. Could the strychnine have been administered inthatNo I myself took a sample of the cocoa remaining in the saucepan andhad it analysed. There was no strychnine present.I heard Poirot chuckle softly beside me.How did you know I whispered.Listen.I should saythe doctor was continuingthat I would have beenconsiderably surprised at any other result.WhySimply because strychnine has an unusually bitter taste. It can bedetected in a solution of one in seventy thousand and can only bedisguised by some strongly flavoured substance. Cocoa would be quitepowerless to mask it.One of the jury wanted to know if the same objection applied to coffee.No. Coffee has a bitter taste of its own which would probably coverthe taste of strychnine.Then you consider it more likely that the drug was administered in thecoffee but that for some unknown reason its action was delayed.Yes but the cup being completely smashed there is no possibility ofanalyzing its contents.This concluded Dr. Bauersteins evidence. Dr. Wilkins corroborated iton all points. Sounded as to the possibility of suicide he repudiatedit utterly. The deceased he said suffered from a weak heart butotherwise enjoyed perfect health and was of a cheerful andwellbalanced disposition. She would be one of the last people to takeher own life.Lawrence Cavendish was next called. His evidence was quite unimportantbeing a mere repetition of that of his brother. Just as he was about tostep down he paused and said rather hesitatinglyI should like to make a suggestion if I mayHe glanced deprecatingly at the Coroner who replied brisklyCertainly Mr. Cavendish we are here to arrive at the truth of thismatter and welcome anything that may lead to further elucidation.It is just an idea of mine explained Lawrence. Of course I may bequite wrong but it still seems to me that my mothers death might beaccounted for by natural means.How do you make that out Mr. CavendishMy mother at the time of her death and for some time before it wastaking a tonic containing strychnine.Ah said the Coroner.The jury looked up interested.I believe continued Lawrence that there have been cases where thecumulative effect of a drug administered for some time has ended bycausing death. Also is it not possible that she may have taken anoverdose of her medicine by accidentThis is the first we have heard of the deceased taking strychnine atthe time of her death. We are much obliged to you Mr. Cavendish.Dr. Wilkins was recalled and ridiculed the idea.What Mr. Cavendish suggests is quite impossible. Any doctor would tellyou the same. Strychnine is in a certain sense a cumulative poisonbut it would be quite impossible for it to result in sudden death inthis way. There would have to be a long period of chronic symptomswhich would at once have attracted my attention. The whole thing isabsurd.And the second suggestion That Mrs. Inglethorp may have inadvertentlytaken an overdoseThree or even four doses would not have resulted in death. Mrs.Inglethorp always had an extra large amount of medicine made up at atime as she dealt with Coots the Cash Chemists in Tadminster. Shewould have had to take very nearly the whole bottle to account for theamount of strychnine found at the postmortem.Then you consider that we may dismiss the tonic as not being in anyway instrumental in causing her deathCertainly. The supposition is ridiculous.The same juryman who had interrupted before here suggested that thechemist who made up the medicine might have committed an error.That of course is always possible replied the doctor.But Dorcas who was the next witness called dispelled even thatpossibility. The medicine had not been newly made up. On the contraryMrs. Inglethorp had taken the last dose on the day of her death.So the question of the tonic was finally abandoned and the Coronerproceeded with his task. Having elicited from Dorcas how she had beenawakened by the violent ringing of her mistresss bell and hadsubsequently roused the household he passed to the subject of thequarrel on the preceding afternoon.Dorcass evidence on this point was substantially what Poirot and I hadalready heard so I will not repeat it here.The next witness was Mary Cavendish. She stood very upright and spokein a low clear and perfectly composed voice. In answer to theCoroners question she told how her alarm clock having aroused her atfourthirty as usual she was dressing when she was startled by thesound of something heavy falling.That would have been the table by the bed commented the Coroner.I opened my door continued Mary and listened. In a few minutes abell rang violently. Dorcas came running down and woke my husband andwe all went to my motherinlaws room but it was lockedThe Coroner interrupted her.I really do not think we need trouble you further on that point. Weknow all that can be known of the subsequent happenings. But I shouldbe obliged if you would tell us all you overheard of the quarrel theday before.IThere was a faint insolence in her voice. She raised her hand andadjusted the ruffle of lace at her neck turning her head a little asshe did so. And quite spontaneously the thought flashed across my mindShe is gaining timeYes. I understand continued the Coroner deliberately that you weresitting reading on the bench just outside the long window of theboudoir. That is so is it notThis was news to me and glancing sideways at Poirot I fancied that itwas news to him as well.There was the faintest pause the mere hesitation of a moment beforeshe answeredYes that is so.And the boudoir window was open was it notSurely her face grew a little paler as she answeredYes.Then you cannot have failed to hear the voices inside especially asthey were raised in anger. In fact they would be more audible whereyou were than in the hall.Possibly.Will you repeat to us what you overheard of the quarrelI really do not remember hearing anything.Do you mean to say you did not hear voicesOh yes I heard the voices but I did not hear what they said. Afaint spot of colour came into her cheek. I am not in the habit oflistening to private conversations.The Coroner persisted.And you remember nothing at all Nothing Mrs. Cavendish Not onestray word or phrase to make you realize that it was a privateconversationShe paused and seemed to reflect still outwardly as calm as ever.Yes I remember. Mrs. Inglethorp said somethingI do not rememberexactly whatabout causing scandal between husband and wife.Ah the Coroner leant back satisfied. That corresponds with whatDorcas heard. But excuse me Mrs. Cavendish although you realized itwas a private conversation you did not move away You remained whereyou wereI caught the momentary gleam of her tawny eyes as she raised them. Ifelt certain that at that moment she would willingly have torn thelittle lawyer with his insinuations into pieces but she repliedquietly enoughNo. I was very comfortable where I was. I fixed my mind on my book.And that is all you can tell usThat is all.The examination was over though I doubted if the Coroner was entirelysatisfied with it. I think he suspected that Mary Cavendish could tellmore if she chose.Amy Hill shop assistant was next called and deposed to having sold awill form on the afternoon of the th to William Earl undergardenerat Styles.William Earl and Manning succeeded her and testified to witnessing adocument. Manning fixed the time at about fourthirty William was ofthe opinion that it was rather earlier.Cynthia Murdoch came next. She had however little to tell. She hadknown nothing of the tragedy until awakened by Mrs. Cavendish.You did not hear the table fallNo. I was fast asleep.The Coroner smiled.A good conscience makes a sound sleeper he observed. Thank youMiss Murdoch that is all.Miss Howard.Miss Howard produced the letter written to her by Mrs. Inglethorp onthe evening of the th. Poirot and I had of course already seen it.It added nothing to our knowledge of the tragedy. The following is afacsimileSTYLES COURTESSEXhand written note July th My dear Evelyn Can we not bury the hachet I have found it hard to forgive the things you said against my dear husband but I am an old woman very fond of you Yours affectionately Emily InglethorpeIt was handed to the jury who scrutinized it attentively.I fear it does not help us much said the Coroner with a sigh.There is no mention of any of the events of that afternoon.Plain as a pikestaff to me said Miss Howard shortly. It showsclearly enough that my poor old friend had just found out shed beenmade a fool ofIt says nothing of the kind in the letter the Coroner pointed out.No because Emily never could bear to put herself in the wrong. ButI know her. She wanted me back. But she wasnt going to own that Idbeen right. She went round about. Most people do. Dont believe in itmyself.Mr. Wells smiled faintly. So I noticed did several of the jury. MissHoward was obviously quite a public character.Anyway all this tomfoolery is a great waste of time continued thelady glancing up and down the jury disparagingly. TalktalktalkWhen all the time we know perfectly wellThe Coroner interrupted her in an agony of apprehensionThank you Miss Howard that is all.I fancy he breathed a sigh of relief when she complied.Then came the sensation of the day. The Coroner called Albert Macechemists assistant.It was our agitated young man of the pale face. In answer to theCoroners questions he explained that he was a qualified pharmacistbut had only recently come to this particular shop as the assistantformerly there had just been called up for the army.These preliminaries completed the Coroner proceeded to business.Mr. Mace have you lately sold strychnine to any unauthorized personYes sir.When was thisLast Monday night.Monday Not TuesdayNo sir Monday the th.Will you tell us to whom you sold itYou could have heard a pin drop.Yes sir. It was to Mr. Inglethorp.Every eye turned simultaneously to where Alfred Inglethorp was sittingimpassive and wooden. He started slightly as the damning words fellfrom the young mans lips. I half thought he was going to rise from hischair but he remained seated although a remarkably well actedexpression of astonishment rose on his face.You are sure of what you say asked the Coroner sternly.Quite sure sir.Are you in the habit of selling strychnine indiscriminately over thecounterThe wretched young man wilted visibly under the Coroners frown.Oh no sirof course not. But seeing it was Mr. Inglethorp of theHall I thought there was no harm in it. He said it was to poison adog.Inwardly I sympathized. It was only human nature to endeavour to pleaseThe Hallespecially when it might result in custom being transferredfrom Coots to the local establishment.Is it not customary for anyone purchasing poison to sign a bookYes sir Mr. Inglethorp did so.Have you got the book hereYes sir.It was produced and with a few words of stern censure the Coronerdismissed the wretched Mr. Mace.Then amidst a breathless silence Alfred Inglethorp was called. Did herealize I wondered how closely the halter was being drawn around hisneckThe Coroner went straight to the point.On Monday evening last did you purchase strychnine for the purpose ofpoisoning a dogInglethorp replied with perfect calmnessNo I did not. There is no dog at Styles except an outdoor sheepdogwhich is in perfect health.You deny absolutely having purchased strychnine from Albert Mace onMonday lastI do.Do you also deny thisThe Coroner handed him the register in which his signature wasinscribed.Certainly I do. The handwriting is quite different from mine. I willshow you.He took an old envelope out of his pocket and wrote his name on ithanding it to the jury. It was certainly utterly dissimilar.Then what is your explanation of Mr. Maces statementAlfred Inglethorp replied imperturbablyMr. Mace must have been mistaken.The Coroner hesitated for a moment and then saidMr. Inglethorp as a mere matter of form would you mind telling uswhere you were on the evening of Monday July thReallyI cannot remember.That is absurd Mr. Inglethorp said the Coroner sharply. Thinkagain.Inglethorp shook his head.I cannot tell you. I have an idea that I was out walking.In what directionI really cant remember.The Coroners face grew graver.Were you in company with anyoneNo.Did you meet anyone on your walkNo.That is a pity said the Coroner dryly. I am to take it then thatyou decline to say where you were at the time that Mr. Mace positivelyrecognized you as entering the shop to purchase strychnineIf you like to take it that way yes.Be careful Mr. Inglethorp.Poirot was fidgeting nervously.Sacré he murmured. Does this imbecile of a man want to bearrestedInglethorp was indeed creating a bad impression. His futile denialswould not have convinced a child. The Coroner however passed brisklyto the next point and Poirot drew a deep breath of relief.You had a discussion with your wife on Tuesday afternoonPardon me interrupted Alfred Inglethorp you have been misinformed.I had no quarrel with my dear wife. The whole story is absolutelyuntrue. I was absent from the house the entire afternoon.Have you anyone who can testify to thatYou have my word said Inglethorp haughtily.The Coroner did not trouble to reply.There are two witnesses who will swear to having heard yourdisagreement with Mrs. Inglethorp.Those witnesses were mistaken.I was puzzled. The man spoke with such quiet assurance that I wasstaggered. I looked at Poirot. There was an expression of exultation onhis face which I could not understand. Was he at last convinced ofAlfred Inglethorps guiltMr. Inglethorp said the Coroner you have heard your wifes dyingwords repeated here. Can you explain them in any wayCertainly I can.You canIt seems to me very simple. The room was dimly lighted. Dr. Bauersteinis much of my height and build and like me wears a beard. In the dimlight and suffering as she was my poor wife mistook him for me.Ah murmured Poirot to himself. But it is an idea thatYou think it is true I whispered.I do not say that. But it is truly an ingenious supposition.You read my wifes last words as an accusationInglethorp wascontinuingthey were on the contrary an appeal to me.The Coroner reflected a moment then he saidI believe Mr. Inglethorp that you yourself poured out the coffeeand took it to your wife that eveningI poured it out yes. But I did not take it to her. I meant to do sobut I was told that a friend was at the hall door so I laid down thecoffee on the hall table. When I came through the hall again a fewminutes later it was gone.This statement might or might not be true but it did not seem to meto improve matters much for Inglethorp. In any case he had had ampletime to introduce the poison.At that point Poirot nudged me gently indicating two men who weresitting together near the door. One was a little sharp darkferretfaced man the other was tall and fair.I questioned Poirot mutely. He put his lips to my ear.Do you know who that little man isI shook my head.That is Detective Inspector James Japp of Scotland YardJimmy Japp.The other man is from Scotland Yard too. Things are moving quickly myfriend.I stared at the two men intently. There was certainly nothing of thepoliceman about them. I should never have suspected them of beingofficial personages.I was still staring when I was startled and recalled by the verdictbeing givenWilful Murder against some person or persons unknown.CHAPTER VII.POIROT PAYS HIS DEBTSAs we came out of the Stylites Arms Poirot drew me aside by a gentlepressure of the arm. I understood his object. He was waiting for theScotland Yard men.In a few moments they emerged and Poirot at once stepped forward andaccosted the shorter of the two.I fear you do not remember me Inspector Japp.Why if it isnt Mr. Poirot cried the Inspector. He turned to theother man. Youve heard me speak of Mr. Poirot It was in he andI worked togetherthe Abercrombie forgery caseyou remember he was rundown in Brussels. Ah those were great days moosier. Then do youremember Baron Altara There was a pretty rogue for you He eludedthe clutches of half the police in Europe. But we nailed him inAntwerpthanks to Mr. Poirot here.As these friendly reminiscences were being indulged in I drew nearerand was introduced to DetectiveInspector Japp who in his turnintroduced us both to his companion Superintendent Summerhaye.I need hardly ask what you are doing here gentlemen remarkedPoirot.Japp closed one eye knowingly.No indeed. Pretty clear case I should say.But Poirot answered gravelyThere I differ from you.Oh come said Summerhaye opening his lips for the first time.Surely the whole thing is clear as daylight. The mans caughtredhanded. How he could be such a fool beats meBut Japp was looking attentively at Poirot.Hold your fire Summerhaye he remarked jocularly. Me and Moosierhere have met beforeand theres no mans judgment Id sooner take thanhis. If Im not greatly mistaken hes got something up his sleeve.Isnt that so moosierPoirot smiled.I have drawn certain conclusionsyes.Summerhaye was still looking rather sceptical but Japp continued hisscrutiny of Poirot.Its this way he said so far weve only seen the case from theoutside. Thats where the Yards at a disadvantage in a case of thiskind where the murders only out so to speak after the inquest. Alot depends on being on the spot first thing and thats where Mr.Poirots had the start of us. We shouldnt have been here as soon asthis even if it hadnt been for the fact that there was a smart doctoron the spot who gave us the tip through the Coroner. But youve beenon the spot from the first and you may have picked up some littlehints. From the evidence at the inquest Mr. Inglethorp murdered hiswife as sure as I stand here and if anyone but you hinted the contraryId laugh in his face. I must say I was surprised the jury didnt bringit in Wilful Murder against him right off. I think they would have ifit hadnt been for the Coronerhe seemed to be holding them back.Perhaps though you have a warrant for his arrest in your pocketnow suggested Poirot.A kind of wooden shutter of officialdom came down from Jappsexpressive countenance.Perhaps I have and perhaps I havent he remarked dryly.Poirot looked at him thoughtfully.I am very anxious Messieurs that he should not be arrested.I dare say observed Summerhaye sarcastically.Japp was regarding Poirot with comical perplexity.Cant you go a little further Mr. Poirot A winks as good as anodfrom you. Youve been on the spotand the Yard doesnt want to makeany mistakes you know.Poirot nodded gravely.That is exactly what I thought. Well I will tell you this. Use yourwarrant Arrest Mr. Inglethorp. But it will bring you no kudosthe caseagainst him will be dismissed at once Comme ça And he snapped hisfingers expressively.Japps face grew grave though Summerhaye gave an incredulous snort.As for me I was literally dumb with astonishment. I could onlyconclude that Poirot was mad.Japp had taken out a handkerchief and was gently dabbing his brow.I darent do it Mr. Poirot. Id take your word but theres othersover me wholl be asking what the devil I mean by it. Cant you give mea little more to go onPoirot reflected a moment.It can be done he said at last. I admit I do not wish it. It forcesmy hand. I would have preferred to work in the dark just for thepresent but what you say is very justthe word of a Belgian policemanwhose day is past is not enough And Alfred Inglethorp must not bearrested. That I have sworn as my friend Hastings here knows. Seethen my good Japp you go at once to StylesWell in about half an hour. Were seeing the Coroner and the doctorfirst.Good. Call for me in passingthe last house in the village. I will gowith you. At Styles Mr. Inglethorp will give you or if he refusesasis probableI will give you such proofs that shall satisfy you that thecase against him could not possibly be sustained. Is that a bargainThats a bargain said Japp heartily. And on behalf of the YardIm much obliged to you though Im bound to confess I cant at presentsee the faintest possible loophole in the evidence but you alwayswere a marvel So long then moosier.The two detectives strode away Summerhaye with an incredulous grin onhis face.Well my friend cried Poirot before I could get in a word what doyou think Mon Dieu I had some warm moments in that court I did notfigure to myself that the man would be so pigheaded as to refuse tosay anything at all. Decidedly it was the policy of an imbecile.Hm There are other explanations besides that of imbecility Iremarked. For if the case against him is true how could he defendhimself except by silenceWhy in a thousand ingenious ways cried Poirot. See say that it isI who have committed this murder I can think of seven most plausiblestories Far more convincing than Mr. Inglethorps stony denialsI could not help laughing.My dear Poirot I am sure you are capable of thinking of seventy Butseriously in spite of what I heard you say to the detectives yousurely cannot still believe in the possibility of Alfred InglethorpsinnocenceWhy not now as much as before Nothing has changed.But the evidence is so conclusive.Yes too conclusive.We turned in at the gate of Leastways Cottage and proceeded up the nowfamiliar stairs.Yes yes too conclusive continued Poirot almost to himself. Realevidence is usually vague and unsatisfactory. It has to beexaminedsifted. But here the whole thing is cut and dried. No myfriend this evidence has been very cleverly manufacturedso cleverlythat it has defeated its own ends.How do you make that outBecause so long as the evidence against him was vague and intangibleit was very hard to disprove. But in his anxiety the criminal hasdrawn the net so closely that one cut will set Inglethorp free.I was silent. And in a minute or two Poirot continuedLet us look at the matter like this. Here is a man let us say whosets out to poison his wife. He has lived by his wits as the sayinggoes. Presumably therefore he has some wits. He is not altogether afool. Well how does he set about it He goes boldly to the villagechemists and purchases strychnine under his own name with a trumpedup story about a dog which is bound to be proved absurd. He does notemploy the poison that night. No he waits until he has had a violentquarrel with her of which the whole household is cognisant and whichnaturally directs their suspicions upon him. He prepares no defencenoshadow of an alibi yet he knows the chemists assistant mustnecessarily come forward with the facts. Bah Do not ask me to believethat any man could be so idiotic Only a lunatic who wished to commitsuicide by causing himself to be hanged would act soStillI do not see I began.Neither do I see. I tell you mon ami it puzzles me. MeHerculePoirotBut if you believe him innocent how do you explain his buying thestrychnineVery simply. He did not buy it.But Mace recognized himI beg your pardon he saw a man with a black beard like Mr.Inglethorps and wearing glasses like Mr. Inglethorp and dressed inMr. Inglethorps rather noticeable clothes. He could not recognize aman whom he had probably only seen in the distance since youremember he himself had only been in the village a fortnight and Mrs.Inglethorp dealt principally with Coots in Tadminster.Then you thinkMon ami do you remember the two points I laid stress upon Leavethe first one for the moment what was the secondThe important fact that Alfred Inglethorp wears peculiar clothes hasa black beard and uses glasses I quoted.Exactly. Now suppose anyone wished to pass himself off as John orLawrence Cavendish. Would it be easyNo I said thoughtfully. Of course an actorBut Poirot cut me short ruthlessly.And why would it not be easy I will tell you my friend Because theyare both cleanshaven men. To make up successfully as one of these twoin broad daylight it would need an actor of genius and a certaininitial facial resemblance. But in the case of Alfred Inglethorp allthat is changed. His clothes his beard the glasses which hide hiseyesthose are the salient points about his personal appearance. Nowwhat is the first instinct of the criminal To divert suspicion fromhimself is it not so And how can he best do that By throwing it onsomeone else. In this instance there was a man ready to his hand.Everybody was predisposed to believe in Mr. Inglethorps guilt. It wasa foregone conclusion that he would be suspected but to make it asure thing there must be tangible proofsuch as the actual buying ofthe poison and that with a man of the peculiar appearance of Mr.Inglethorp was not difficult. Remember this young Mace had neveractually spoken to Mr. Inglethorp. How should he doubt that the man inhis clothes with his beard and his glasses was not AlfredInglethorpIt may be so I said fascinated by Poirots eloquence. But if thatwas the case why does he not say where he was at six oclock on MondayeveningAh why indeed said Poirot calming down. If he were arrested heprobably would speak but I do not want it to come to that. I must makehim see the gravity of his position. There is of course somethingdiscreditable behind his silence. If he did not murder his wife he isnevertheless a scoundrel and has something of his own to concealquite apart from the murder.What can it be I mused won over to Poirots views for the momentalthough still retaining a faint conviction that the obvious deductionwas the correct one.Can you not guess asked Poirot smiling.No can youOh yes I had a little idea sometime agoand it has turned out to becorrect.You never told me I said reproachfully.Poirot spread out his hands apologetically.Pardon me mon ami you were not precisely sympathique. He turnedto me earnestly. Tell meyou see now that he must not be arrestedPerhaps I said doubtfully for I was really quite indifferent to thefate of Alfred Inglethorp and thought that a good fright would do himno harm.Poirot who was watching me intently gave a sigh.Come my friend he said changing the subject apart from Mr.Inglethorp how did the evidence at the inquest strike youOh pretty much what I expected.Did nothing strike you as peculiar about itMy thoughts flew to Mary Cavendish and I hedgedIn what wayWell Mr. Lawrence Cavendishs evidence for instanceI was relieved.Oh Lawrence No I dont think so. Hes always a nervous chap.His suggestion that his mother might have been poisoned accidentallyby means of the tonic she was taking that did not strike you asstrange heinNo I cant say it did. The doctors ridiculed it of course. But it wasquite a natural suggestion for a layman to make.But Monsieur Lawrence is not a layman. You told me yourself that hehad started by studying medicine and that he had taken his degree.Yes thats true. I never thought of that. I was rather startled. Itis odd.Poirot nodded.From the first his behaviour has been peculiar. Of all the householdhe alone would be likely to recognize the symptoms of strychninepoisoning and yet we find him the only member of the family to upholdstrenuously the theory of death from natural causes. If it had beenMonsieur John I could have understood it. He has no technicalknowledge and is by nature unimaginative. But Monsieur LawrencenoAnd now today he puts forward a suggestion that he himself must haveknown was ridiculous. There is food for thought in this mon amiIts very confusing I agreed.Then there is Mrs. Cavendish continued Poirot. Thats another whois not telling all she knows What do you make of her attitudeI dont know what to make of it. It seems inconceivable that sheshould be shielding Alfred Inglethorp. Yet that is what it looks like.Poirot nodded reflectively.Yes it is queer. One thing is certain she overheard a good deal moreof that private conversation than she was willing to admit.And yet she is the last person one would accuse of stooping toeavesdropExactly. One thing her evidence has shown me. I made a mistake.Dorcas was quite right. The quarrel did take place earlier in theafternoon about four oclock as she said.I looked at him curiously. I had never understood his insistence onthat point.Yes a good deal that was peculiar came out today continued Poirot.Dr. Bauerstein now what was he doing up and dressed at that hourin the morning It is astonishing to me that no one commented on thefact.He has insomnia I believe I said doubtfully.Which is a very good or a very bad explanation remarked Poirot. Itcovers everything and explains nothing. I shall keep my eye on ourclever Dr. Bauerstein.Any more faults to find with the evidence I inquired satirically.Mon ami replied Poirot gravely when you find that people are nottelling you the truthlook out Now unless I am much mistaken at theinquest today only oneat most two persons were speaking the truthwithout reservation or subterfuge.Oh come now Poirot I wont cite Lawrence or Mrs. Cavendish. Buttheres Johnand Miss Howard surely they were speaking the truthBoth of them my friend One I grant you but bothHis words gave me an unpleasant shock. Miss Howards evidenceunimportant as it was had been given in such a downrightstraightforward manner that it had never occurred to me to doubt hersincerity. Still I had a great respect for Poirots sagacityexcept onthe occasions when he was what I described to myself as foolishlypigheaded.Do you really think so I asked. Miss Howard had always seemed to meso essentially honestalmost uncomfortably so.Poirot gave me a curious look which I could not quite fathom. Heseemed to speak and then checked himself.Miss Murdoch too I continued theres nothing untruthful abouther.No. But it was strange that she never heard a sound sleeping nextdoor whereas Mrs. Cavendish in the other wing of the buildingdistinctly heard the table fall.Well shes young. And she sleeps soundly.Ah yes indeed She must be a famous sleeper that oneI did not quite like the tone of his voice but at that moment a smartknock reached our ears and looking out of the window we perceived thetwo detectives waiting for us below.Poirot seized his hat gave a ferocious twist to his moustache andcarefully brushing an imaginary speck of dust from his sleeve motionedme to precede him down the stairs there we joined the detectives andset out for Styles.I think the appearance of the two Scotland Yard men was rather ashockespecially to John though of course after the verdict he hadrealized that it was only a matter of time. Still the presence of thedetectives brought the truth home to him more than anything else couldhave done.Poirot had conferred with Japp in a low tone on the way up and it wasthe latter functionary who requested that the household with theexception of the servants should be assembled together in thedrawingroom. I realized the significance of this. It was up to Poirotto make his boast good.Personally I was not sanguine. Poirot might have excellent reasons forhis belief in Inglethorps innocence but a man of the type ofSummerhaye would require tangible proofs and these I doubted if Poirotcould supply.Before very long we had all trooped into the drawingroom the door ofwhich Japp closed. Poirot politely set chairs for everyone. TheScotland Yard men were the cynosure of all eyes. I think that for thefirst time we realized that the thing was not a bad dream but atangible reality. We had read of such thingsnow we ourselves wereactors in the drama. Tomorrow the daily papers all over Englandwould blazon out the news in staring headlinesMYSTERIOUS TRAGEDY IN ESSEX WEALTHY LADY POISONEDThere would be pictures of Styles snapshots of The family leavingthe Inquestthe village photographer had not been idle All the thingsthat one had read a hundred timesthings that happen to other peoplenot to oneself. And now in this house a murder had been committed. Infront of us were the detectives in charge of the case. The wellknownglib phraseology passed rapidly through my mind in the interval beforePoirot opened the proceedings.I think everyone was a little surprised that it should be he and notone of the official detectives who took the initiative.Mesdames and messieurs said Poirot bowing as though he were acelebrity about to deliver a lecture I have asked you to come hereall together for a certain object. That object it concerns Mr. AlfredInglethorp.Inglethorp was sitting a little by himselfI think unconsciouslyeveryone had drawn his chair slightly away from himand he gave a faintstart as Poirot pronounced his name.Mr. Inglethorp said Poirot addressing him directly a very darkshadow is resting on this housethe shadow of murder.Inglethorp shook his head sadly.My poor wife he murmured. Poor Emily It is terrible.I do not think monsieur said Poirot pointedly that you quiterealize how terrible it may befor you. And as Inglethorp did notappear to understand he added Mr. Inglethorp you are standing invery grave danger.The two detectives fidgeted. I saw the official caution Anything yousay will be used in evidence against you actually hovering onSummerhayes lips. Poirot went on.Do you understand now monsieurNo. What do you meanI mean said Poirot deliberately that you are suspected ofpoisoning your wife.A little gasp ran round the circle at this plain speaking.Good heavens cried Inglethorp starting up. What a monstrous ideaIpoison my dearest EmilyI do not thinkPoirot watched him narrowlythat you quite realizethe unfavourable nature of your evidence at the inquest. Mr.Inglethorp knowing what I have now told you do you still refuse tosay where you were at six oclock on Monday afternoonWith a groan Alfred Inglethorp sank down again and buried his face inhis hands. Poirot approached and stood over him.Speak he cried menacingly.With an effort Inglethorp raised his face from his hands. Then slowlyand deliberately he shook his head.You will not speakNo. I do not believe that anyone could be so monstrous as to accuse meof what you say.Poirot nodded thoughtfully like a man whose mind is made up.Soit he said. Then I must speak for you.Alfred Inglethorp sprang up again.You How can you speak You do not know he broke off abruptly.Poirot turned to face us. Mesdames and messieurs I speak ListenI Hercule Poirot affirm that the man who entered the chemists shopand purchased strychnine at six oclock on Monday last was not Mr.Inglethorp for at six oclock on that day Mr. Inglethorp was escortingMrs. Raikes back to her home from a neighbouring farm. I can produce noless than five witnesses to swear to having seen them together eitherat six or just after and as you may know the Abbey Farm Mrs.Raikess home is at least two and a half miles distant from thevillage. There is absolutely no question as to the alibiCHAPTER VIII.FRESH SUSPICIONSThere was a moments stupefied silence. Japp who was the leastsurprised of any of us was the first to speak.My word he cried youre the goods And no mistake Mr. PoirotThese witnesses of yours are all right I supposeVoilà I have prepared a list of themnames and addresses. You mustsee them of course. But you will find it all right.Im sure of that. Japp lowered his voice. Im much obliged to you. Apretty mares nest arresting him would have been. He turned toInglethorp. But if youll excuse me sir why couldnt you say allthis at the inquestI will tell you why interrupted Poirot. There was a certainrumourA most malicious and utterly untrue one interrupted AlfredInglethorp in an agitated voice.And Mr. Inglethorp was anxious to have no scandal revived just atpresent. Am I rightQuite right. Inglethorp nodded. With my poor Emily not yet buriedcan you wonder I was anxious that no more lying rumours should bestarted.Between you and me sir remarked Japp Id sooner have any amountof rumours than be arrested for murder. And I venture to think yourpoor lady would have felt the same. And if it hadnt been for Mr.Poirot here arrested you would have been as sure as eggs is eggsI was foolish no doubt murmured Inglethorp. But you do not knowinspector how I have been persecuted and maligned. And he shot abaleful glance at Evelyn Howard.Now sir said Japp turning briskly to John I should like to seethe ladys bedroom please and after that Ill have a little chat withthe servants. Dont you bother about anything. Mr. Poirot here willshow me the way.As they all went out of the room Poirot turned and made me a sign tofollow him upstairs. There he caught me by the arm and drew me aside.Quick go to the other wing. Stand therejust this side of the baizedoor. Do not move till I come. Then turning rapidly he rejoined thetwo detectives.I followed his instructions taking up my position by the baize doorand wondering what on earth lay behind the request. Why was I to standin this particular spot on guard I looked thoughtfully down thecorridor in front of me. An idea struck me. With the exception ofCynthia Murdochs everyones room was in this left wing. Had thatanything to do with it Was I to report who came or went I stoodfaithfully at my post. The minutes passed. Nobody came. Nothinghappened.It must have been quite twenty minutes before Poirot rejoined me.You have not stirredNo Ive stuck here like a rock. Nothings happened.Ah Was he pleased or disappointed Youve seen nothing at allNo.But you have probably heard something A big bumpeh mon amiNo.Is it possible Ah but I am vexed with myself I am not usuallyclumsy. I made but a slight gestureI know Poirots gestureswith theleft hand and over went the table by the bedHe looked so childishly vexed and crestfallen that I hastened toconsole him.Never mind old chap. What does it matter Your triumph downstairsexcited you. I can tell you that was a surprise to us all. There mustbe more in this affair of Inglethorps with Mrs. Raikes than wethought to make him hold his tongue so persistently. What are yougoing to do now Where are the Scotland Yard fellowsGone down to interview the servants. I showed them all our exhibits. Iam disappointed in Japp. He has no methodHullo I said looking out of the window. Heres Dr. Bauerstein. Ibelieve youre right about that man Poirot. I dont like him.He is clever observed Poirot meditatively.Oh clever as the devil I must say I was overjoyed to see him in theplight he was in on Tuesday. You never saw such a spectacle And Idescribed the doctors adventure. He looked a regular scarecrowPlastered with mud from head to foot.You saw him thenYes. Of course he didnt want to come init was just after dinnerbutMr. Inglethorp insisted.What Poirot caught me violently by the shoulders. Was Dr.Bauerstein here on Tuesday evening Here And you never told me Whydid you not tell me Why WhyHe appeared to be in an absolute frenzy.My dear Poirot I expostulated I never thought it would interestyou. I didnt know it was of any importance.Importance It is of the first importance So Dr. Bauerstein was hereon Tuesday nightthe night of the murder. Hastings do you not seeThat alters everythingeverythingI had never seen him so upset. Loosening his hold of me hemechanically straightened a pair of candlesticks still murmuring tohimself Yes that alters everythingeverything.Suddenly he seemed to come to a decision.Allons he said. We must act at once. Where is Mr. CavendishJohn was in the smokingroom. Poirot went straight to him.Mr. Cavendish I have some important business in Tadminster. A newclue. May I take your motorWhy of course. Do you mean at onceIf you please.John rang the bell and ordered round the car. In another ten minuteswe were racing down the park and along the high road to Tadminster.Now Poirot I remarked resignedly perhaps you will tell me whatall this is aboutWell mon ami a good deal you can guess for yourself. Of course yourealize that now Mr. Inglethorp is out of it the whole position isgreatly changed. We are face to face with an entirely new problem. Weknow now that there is one person who did not buy the poison. We havecleared away the manufactured clues. Now for the real ones. I haveascertained that anyone in the household with the exception of Mrs.Cavendish who was playing tennis with you could have personated Mr.Inglethorp on Monday evening. In the same way we have his statementthat he put the coffee down in the hall. No one took much notice ofthat at the inquestbut now it has a very different significance. Wemust find out who did take that coffee to Mrs. Inglethorp eventuallyor who passed through the hall whilst it was standing there. From youraccount there are only two people whom we can positively say did notgo near the coffeeMrs. Cavendish and Mademoiselle Cynthia.Yes that is so. I felt an inexpressible lightening of the heart.Mary Cavendish could certainly not rest under suspicion.In clearing Alfred Inglethorp continued Poirot I have been obligedto show my hand sooner than I intended. As long as I might be thoughtto be pursuing him the criminal would be off his guard. Now he willbe doubly careful. Yesdoubly careful. He turned to me abruptly. Tellme Hastings you yourselfhave you no suspicions of anybodyI hesitated. To tell the truth an idea wild and extravagant initself had once or twice that morning flashed through my brain. I hadrejected it as absurd nevertheless it persisted.You couldnt call it a suspicion I murmured. Its so utterlyfoolish.Come now urged Poirot encouragingly. Do not fear. Speak your mind.You should always pay attention to your instincts.Well then I blurted out its absurdbut I suspect Miss Howard ofnot telling all she knowsMiss HowardYesyoull laugh at meNot at all. Why should II cant help feeling I continued blunderingly that weve ratherleft her out of the possible suspects simply on the strength of herhaving been away from the place. But after all she was only fifteenmiles away. A car would do it in half an hour. Can we say positivelythat she was away from Styles on the night of the murderYes my friend said Poirot unexpectedly we can. One of my firstactions was to ring up the hospital where she was working.WellWell I learnt that Miss Howard had been on afternoon duty on Tuesdayand thata convoy coming in unexpectedlyshe had kindly offered toremain on night duty which offer was gratefully accepted. Thatdisposes of that.Oh I said rather nonplussed. Really I continued its herextraordinary vehemence against Inglethorp that started me offsuspecting her. I cant help feeling shed do anything against him. AndI had an idea she might know something about the destroying of thewill. She might have burnt the new one mistaking it for the earlierone in his favour. She is so terribly bitter against him.You consider her vehemence unnaturalYes. She is so very violent. I wondered really whether she is quitesane on that point.Poirot shook his head energetically.No no you are on a wrong tack there. There is nothing weakminded ordegenerate about Miss Howard. She is an excellent specimen ofwellbalanced English beef and brawn. She is sanity itself.Yet her hatred of Inglethorp seems almost a mania. My idea wasa veryridiculous one no doubtthat she had intended to poison himand thatin some way Mrs. Inglethorp got hold of it by mistake. But I dont atall see how it could have been done. The whole thing is absurd andridiculous to the last degree.Still you are right in one thing. It is always wise to suspecteverybody until you can prove logically and to your own satisfactionthat they are innocent. Now what reasons are there against MissHowards having deliberately poisoned Mrs. InglethorpWhy she was devoted to her I exclaimed.Tcha Tcha cried Poirot irritably. You argue like a child. If MissHoward were capable of poisoning the old lady she would be quiteequally capable of simulating devotion. No we must look elsewhere. Youare perfectly correct in your assumption that her vehemence againstAlfred Inglethorp is too violent to be natural but you are quite wrongin the deduction you draw from it. I have drawn my own deductionswhich I believe to be correct but I will not speak of them atpresent. He paused a minute then went on. Now to my way ofthinking there is one insuperable objection to Miss Howards being themurderess.And that isThat in no possible way could Mrs. Inglethorps death benefit MissHoward. Now there is no murder without a motive.I reflected.Could not Mrs. Inglethorp have made a will in her favourPoirot shook his head.But you yourself suggested that possibility to Mr. WellsPoirot smiled.That was for a reason. I did not want to mention the name of theperson who was actually in my mind. Miss Howard occupied very much thesame position so I used her name instead.Still Mrs. Inglethorp might have done so. Why that will made on theafternoon of her death mayBut Poirots shake of the head was so energetic that I stopped.No my friend. I have certain little ideas of my own about that will.But I can tell you this muchit was not in Miss Howards favour.I accepted his assurance though I did not really see how he could beso positive about the matter.Well I said with a sigh we will acquit Miss Howard then. It ispartly your fault that I ever came to suspect her. It was what you saidabout her evidence at the inquest that set me off.Poirot looked puzzled.What did I say about her evidence at the inquestDont you remember When I cited her and John Cavendish as being abovesuspicionOhahyes. He seemed a little confused but recovered himself. Bythe way Hastings there is something I want you to do for me.Certainly. What is itNext time you happen to be alone with Lawrence Cavendish I want youto say this to him. I have a message for you from Poirot. He saysFind the extra coffeecup and you can rest in peace Nothing more.Nothing less.Find the extra coffeecup and you can rest in peace. Is thatright I asked much mystified.Excellent.But what does it meanAh that I will leave you to find out. You have access to the facts.Just say that to him and see what he says.Very wellbut its all extremely mysterious.We were running into Tadminster now and Poirot directed the car to theAnalytical Chemist.Poirot hopped down briskly and went inside. In a few minutes he wasback again.There he said. That is all my business.What were you doing there I asked in lively curiosity.I left something to be analysed.Yes but whatThe sample of cocoa I took from the saucepan in the bedroom.But that has already been tested I cried stupefied. Dr. Bauersteinhad it tested and you yourself laughed at the possibility of therebeing strychnine in it.I know Dr. Bauerstein had it tested replied Poirot quietly.Well thenWell I have a fancy for having it analysed again that is all.And not another word on the subject could I drag out of him.This proceeding of Poirots in respect of the cocoa puzzled meintensely. I could see neither rhyme nor reason in it. However myconfidence in him which at one time had rather waned was fullyrestored since his belief in Alfred Inglethorps innocence had been sotriumphantly vindicated.The funeral of Mrs. Inglethorp took place the following day and onMonday as I came down to a late breakfast John drew me aside andinformed me that Mr. Inglethorp was leaving that morning to take uphis quarters at the Stylites Arms until he should have completed hisplans.And really its a great relief to think hes going Hastingscontinued my honest friend. It was bad enough before when we thoughthed done it but Im hanged if it isnt worse now when we all feelguilty for having been so down on the fellow. The fact is wevetreated him abominably. Of course things did look black against him. Idont see how anyone could blame us for jumping to the conclusions wedid. Still there it is we were in the wrong and now theres abeastly feeling that one ought to make amends which is difficult whenone doesnt like the fellow a bit better than one did before. The wholethings damned awkward And Im thankful hes had the tact to takehimself off. Its a good thing Styles wasnt the maters to leave tohim. Couldnt bear to think of the fellow lording it here. Hes welcometo her money.Youll be able to keep up the place all right I asked.Oh yes. There are the death duties of course but half my fathersmoney goes with the place and Lawrence will stay with us for thepresent so there is his share as well. We shall be pinched at firstof course because as I once told you I am in a bit of a holefinancially myself. Still the Johnnies will wait now.In the general relief at Inglethorps approaching departure we had themost genial breakfast we had experienced since the tragedy. Cynthiawhose young spirits were naturally buoyant was looking quite herpretty self again and we all with the exception of Lawrence whoseemed unalterably gloomy and nervous were quietly cheerful at theopening of a new and hopeful future.The papers of course had been full of the tragedy. Glaring headlinessandwiched biographies of every member of the household subtleinnuendoes the usual familiar tag about the police having a clue.Nothing was spared us. It was a slack time. The war was momentarilyinactive and the newspapers seized with avidity on this crime infashionable life The Mysterious Affair at Styles was the topic ofthe moment.Naturally it was very annoying for the Cavendishes. The house wasconstantly besieged by reporters who were consistently deniedadmission but who continued to haunt the village and the groundswhere they lay in wait with cameras for any unwary members of thehousehold. We all lived in a blast of publicity. The Scotland Yard mencame and went examining questioning lynxeyed and reserved oftongue. Towards what end they were working we did not know. Had theyany clue or would the whole thing remain in the category ofundiscovered crimesAfter breakfast Dorcas came up to me rather mysteriously and asked ifshe might have a few words with me.Certainly. What is it DorcasWell its just this sir. Youll be seeing the Belgian gentlemantoday perhaps I nodded. Well sir you know how he asked me soparticular if the mistress or anyone else had a green dressYes yes. You have found one My interest was aroused.No not that sir. But since then Ive remembered what the younggentlemenJohn and Lawrence were still the young gentlemen toDorcascall the dressingup box. Its up in the front attic sir. Agreat chest full of old clothes and fancy dresses and what not. Andit came to me sudden like that there might be a green dress amongstthem. So if youd tell the Belgian gentlemanI will tell him Dorcas I promised.Thank you very much sir. A very nice gentleman he is sir. And quitea different class from them two detectives from London what goesprying about and asking questions. I dont hold with foreigners as arule but from what the newspapers say I make out as how these braveBelges isnt the ordinary run of foreigners and certainly hes a mostpolite spoken gentleman.Dear old Dorcas As she stood there with her honest face upturned tomine I thought what a fine specimen she was of the oldfashionedservant that is so fast dying out.I thought I might as well go down to the village at once and look upPoirot but I met him halfway coming up to the house and at oncegave him Dorcass message.Ah the brave Dorcas We will look at the chest althoughbut nomatterwe will examine it all the same.We entered the house by one of the windows. There was no one in thehall and we went straight up to the attic.Sure enough there was the chest a fine old piece all studded withbrass nails and full to overflowing with every imaginable type ofgarment.Poirot bundled everything out on the floor with scant ceremony. Therewere one or two green fabrics of varying shades but Poirot shook hishead over them all. He seemed somewhat apathetic in the search asthough he expected no great results from it. Suddenly he gave anexclamation.What is itLookThe chest was nearly empty and there reposing right at the bottomwas a magnificent black beard.Ohó said Poirot. Ohó He turned it over in his handsexamining it closely. New he remarked. Yes quite new.After a moments hesitation he replaced it in the chest heaped allthe other things on top of it as before and made his way brisklydownstairs. He went straight to the pantry where we found Dorcasbusily polishing her silver.Poirot wished her good morning with Gallic politeness and went onWe have been looking through that chest Dorcas. I am much obliged toyou for mentioning it. There is indeed a fine collection there. Arethey often used may I askWell sir not very often nowadays though from time to time we dohave what the young gentlemen call a dressup night. And very funnyit is sometimes sir. Mr. Lawrence hes wonderful. Most comic I shallnever forget the night he came down as the Char of Persia I think hecalled ita sort of Eastern King it was. He had the big paper knife inhis hand and Mind Dorcas he says youll have to be veryrespectful. This is my specially sharpened scimitar and its off withyour head if Im at all displeased with you Miss Cynthia she waswhat they call an Apache or some such namea Frenchified sort ofcutthroat I take it to be. A real sight she looked. Youd never havebelieved a pretty young lady like that could have made herself intosuch a ruffian. Nobody would have known her.These evenings must have been great fun said Poirot genially. Isuppose Mr. Lawrence wore that fine black beard in the chest upstairswhen he was Shah of PersiaHe did have a beard sir replied Dorcas smiling. And well I knowit for he borrowed two skeins of my black wool to make it with AndIm sure it looked wonderfully natural at a distance. I didnt know asthere was a beard up there at all. It must have been got quite latelyI think. There was a red wig I know but nothing else in the way ofhair. Burnt corks they use mostlythough tis messy getting it offagain. Miss Cynthia was a nigger once and oh the trouble she had.So Dorcas knows nothing about that black beard said Poirotthoughtfully as we walked out into the hall again.Do you think it is the one I whispered eagerly.Poirot nodded.I do. You notice it had been trimmedNo.Yes. It was cut exactly the shape of Mr. Inglethorps and I found oneor two snipped hairs. Hastings this affair is very deep.Who put it in the chest I wonderSomeone with a good deal of intelligence remarked Poirot dryly. Yourealize that he chose the one place in the house to hide it where itspresence would not be remarked Yes he is intelligent. But we must bemore intelligent. We must be so intelligent that he does not suspect usof being intelligent at all.I acquiesced.There mon ami you will be of great assistance to me.I was pleased with the compliment. There had been times when I hardlythought that Poirot appreciated me at my true worth.Yes he continued staring at me thoughtfully you will beinvaluable.This was naturally gratifying but Poirots next words were not sowelcome.I must have an ally in the house he observed reflectively.You have me I protested.True but you are not sufficient.I was hurt and showed it. Poirot hurried to explain himself.You do not quite take my meaning. You are known to be working with me.I want somebody who is not associated with us in any way.Oh I see. How about JohnNo I think not.The dear fellow isnt perhaps very bright I said thoughtfully.Here comes Miss Howard said Poirot suddenly. She is the veryperson. But I am in her black books since I cleared Mr. Inglethorp.Still we can but try.With a nod that was barely civil Miss Howard assented to Poirotsrequest for a few minutes conversation.We went into the little morningroom and Poirot closed the door.Well Monsieur Poirot said Miss Howard impatiently what is it Outwith it. Im busy.Do you remember mademoiselle that I once asked you to help meYes I do. The lady nodded. And I told you Id help you withpleasureto hang Alfred Inglethorp.Ah Poirot studied her seriously. Miss Howard I will ask you onequestion. I beg of you to reply to it truthfully.Never tell lies replied Miss Howard.It is this. Do you still believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned byher husbandWhat do you mean she asked sharply. You neednt think your prettyexplanations influence me in the slightest. Ill admit that it wasnthe who bought strychnine at the chemists shop. What of that I daresay he soaked fly paper as I told you at the beginning.That is arsenicnot strychnine said Poirot mildly.What does that matter Arsenic would put poor Emily out of the wayjust as well as strychnine. If Im convinced he did it it doesntmatter a jot to me how he did it.Exactly. If you are convinced he did it said Poirot quietly. Iwill put my question in another form. Did you ever in your heart ofhearts believe that Mrs. Inglethorp was poisoned by her husbandGood heavens cried Miss Howard. Havent I always told you the manis a villain Havent I always told you he would murder her in her bedHavent I always hated him like poisonExactly said Poirot. That bears out my little idea entirely.What little ideaMiss Howard do you remember a conversation that took place on the dayof my friends arrival here He repeated it to me and there is asentence of yours that has impressed me very much. Do you rememberaffirming that if a crime had been committed and anyone you loved hadbeen murdered you felt certain that you would know by instinct who thecriminal was even if you were quite unable to prove itYes I remember saying that. I believe it too. I suppose you think itnonsenseNot at all.And yet you will pay no attention to my instinct against AlfredInglethorp.No said Poirot curtly. Because your instinct is not against Mr.Inglethorp.WhatNo. You wish to believe he committed the crime. You believe himcapable of committing it. But your instinct tells you he did not commitit. It tells you moreshall I go onShe was staring at him fascinated and made a slight affirmativemovement of the hand.Shall I tell you why you have been so vehement against Mr. InglethorpIt is because you have been trying to believe what you wish to believe.It is because you are trying to drown and stifle your instinct whichtells you another nameNo no no cried Miss Howard wildly flinging up her hands. Dontsay it Oh dont say it It isnt true It cant be true. I dont knowwhat put such a wildsuch a dreadfulidea into my headI am right am I not asked Poirot.Yes yes you must be a wizard to have guessed. But it cant besoits too monstrous too impossible. It must be Alfred Inglethorp.Poirot shook his head gravely.Dont ask me about it continued Miss Howard because I shant tellyou. I wont admit it even to myself. I must be mad to think of such athing.Poirot nodded as if satisfied.I will ask you nothing. It is enough for me that it is as I thought.And II too have an instinct. We are working together towards acommon end.Dont ask me to help you because I wont. I wouldnt lift a fingertoto She faltered.You will help me in spite of yourself. I ask you nothingbut you willbe my ally. You will not be able to help yourself. You will do the onlything that I want of you.And that isYou will watchEvelyn Howard bowed her head.Yes I cant help doing that. I am always watchingalways hoping Ishall be proved wrong.If we are wrong well and good said Poirot. No one will be morepleased than I shall. But if we are right If we are right MissHoward on whose side are you thenI dont know I dont knowCome now.It could be hushed up.There must be no hushing up.But Emily herself She broke off.Miss Howard said Poirot gravely this is unworthy of you.Suddenly she took her face from her hands.Yes she said quietly that was not Evelyn Howard who spoke Sheflung her head up proudly. This is Evelyn Howard And she is on theside of Justice Let the cost be what it may. And with these wordsshe walked firmly out of the room.There said Poirot looking after her goes a very valuable ally.That woman Hastings has got brains as well as a heart.I did not reply.Instinct is a marvellous thing mused Poirot. It can neither beexplained nor ignored.You and Miss Howard seem to know what you are talking about Iobserved coldly. Perhaps you dont realize that I am still in thedark.Really Is that so mon amiYes. Enlighten me will youPoirot studied me attentively for a moment or two. Then to my intensesurprise he shook his head decidedly.No my friend.Oh look here why notTwo is enough for a secret.Well I think it is very unfair to keep back facts from me.I am not keeping back facts. Every fact that I know is in yourpossession. You can draw your own deductions from them. This time it isa question of ideas.Still it would be interesting to know.Poirot looked at me very earnestly and again shook his head.You see he said sadly you have no instincts.It was intelligence you were requiring just now I pointed out.The two often go together said Poirot enigmatically.The remark seemed so utterly irrelevant that I did not even take thetrouble to answer it. But I decided that if I made any interesting andimportant discoveriesas no doubt I shouldI would keep them to myselfand surprise Poirot with the ultimate result.There are times when it is ones duty to assert oneself.CHAPTER IX.DR. BAUERSTEINI had had no opportunity as yet of passing on Poirots message toLawrence. But now as I strolled out on the lawn still nursing agrudge against my friends highhandedness I saw Lawrence on thecroquet lawn aimlessly knocking a couple of very ancient balls aboutwith a still more ancient mallet.It struck me that it would be a good opportunity to deliver my message.Otherwise Poirot himself might relieve me of it. It was true that Idid not quite gather its purport but I flattered myself that byLawrences reply and perhaps a little skillful crossexamination on mypart I should soon perceive its significance. Accordingly I accostedhim.Ive been looking for you I remarked untruthfully.Have youYes. The truth is Ive got a message for youfrom Poirot.YesHe told me to wait until I was alone with you I said dropping myvoice significantly and watching him intently out of the corner of myeye. I have always been rather good at what is called I believecreating an atmosphere.WellThere was no change of expression in the dark melancholic face. Had heany idea of what I was about to sayThis is the message. I dropped my voice still lower. Find the extracoffeecup and you can rest in peace.What on earth does he mean Lawrence stared at me in quite unaffectedastonishment.Dont you knowNot in the least. Do youI was compelled to shake my head.What extra coffeecupI dont know.Hed better ask Dorcas or one of the maids if he wants to know aboutcoffeecups. Its their business not mine. I dont know anything aboutthe coffeecups except that weve got some that are never used whichare a perfect dream Old Worcester. Youre not a connoisseur are youHastingsI shook my head.You miss a lot. A really perfect bit of old chinaits pure delight tohandle it or even to look at it.Well what am I to tell PoirotTell him I dont know what hes talking about. Its double Dutch tome.All right.I was moving off towards the house again when he suddenly called meback.I say what was the end of that message Say it over again will youFind the extra coffeecup and you can rest in peace. Are you sureyou dont know what it means I asked him earnestly.He shook his head.No he said musingly I dont. II wish I did.The boom of the gong sounded from the house and we went in together.Poirot had been asked by John to remain to lunch and was alreadyseated at the table.By tacit consent all mention of the tragedy was barred. We conversedon the war and other outside topics. But after the cheese and biscuitshad been handed round and Dorcas had left the room Poirot suddenlyleant forward to Mrs. Cavendish.Pardon me madame for recalling unpleasant memories but I have alittle ideaPoirots little ideas were becoming a perfectbywordand would like to ask one or two questions.Of me Certainly.You are too amiable madame. What I want to ask is this the doorleading into Mrs. Inglethorps room from that of Mademoiselle Cynthiait was bolted you sayCertainly it was bolted replied Mary Cavendish rather surprised. Isaid so at the inquest.BoltedYes. She looked perplexed.I mean explained Poirot you are sure it was bolted and not merelylockedOh I see what you mean. No I dont know. I said bolted meaning thatit was fastened and I could not open it but I believe all the doorswere found bolted on the inside.Still as far as you are concerned the door might equally well havebeen lockedOh yes.You yourself did not happen to notice madame when you entered Mrs.Inglethorps room whether that door was bolted or notII believe it was.But you did not see itNo. Inever looked.But I did interrupted Lawrence suddenly. I happened to noticethat it was bolted.Ah that settles it. And Poirot looked crestfallen.I could not help rejoicing that for once one of his little ideashad come to naught.After lunch Poirot begged me to accompany him home. I consented ratherstiffly.You are annoyed is it not so he asked anxiously as we walkedthrough the park.Not at all I said coldly.That is well. That lifts a great load from my mind.This was not quite what I had intended. I had hoped that he would haveobserved the stiffness of my manner. Still the fervour of his wordswent towards the appeasing of my just displeasure. I thawed.I gave Lawrence your message I said.And what did he say He was entirely puzzledYes. I am quite sure he had no idea of what you meant.I had expected Poirot to be disappointed but to my surprise hereplied that that was as he had thought and that he was very glad. Mypride forbade me to ask any questions.Poirot switched off on another tack.Mademoiselle Cynthia was not at lunch today How was thatShe is at the hospital again. She resumed work today.Ah she is an industrious little demoiselle. And pretty too. She islike pictures I have seen in Italy. I would rather like to see thatdispensary of hers. Do you think she would show it to meI am sure she would be delighted. Its an interesting little place.Does she go there every dayShe has all Wednesdays off and comes back to lunch on Saturdays.Those are her only times off.I will remember. Women are doing great work nowadays and MademoiselleCynthia is cleveroh yes she has brains that little one.Yes. I believe she has passed quite a stiff exam.Without doubt. After all it is very responsible work. I suppose theyhave very strong poisons thereYes she showed them to us. They are kept locked up in a littlecupboard. I believe they have to be very careful. They always take outthe key before leaving the room.Indeed. It is near the window this cupboardNo right the other side of the room. WhyPoirot shrugged his shoulders.I wondered. That is all. Will you come inWe had reached the cottage.No. I think Ill be getting back. I shall go round the long waythrough the woods.The woods round Styles were very beautiful. After the walk across theopen park it was pleasant to saunter lazily through the cool glades.There was hardly a breath of wind the very chirp of the birds wasfaint and subdued. I strolled on a little way and finally flung myselfdown at the foot of a grand old beechtree. My thoughts of mankind werekindly and charitable. I even forgave Poirot for his absurd secrecy. Infact I was at peace with the world. Then I yawned.I thought about the crime and it struck me as being very unreal andfar off.I yawned again.Probably I thought it really never happened. Of course it was all abad dream. The truth of the matter was that it was Lawrence who hadmurdered Alfred Inglethorp with a croquet mallet. But it was absurd ofJohn to make such a fuss about it and to go shouting out I tell youI wont have itI woke up with a start.At once I realized that I was in a very awkward predicament. For abouttwelve feet away from me John and Mary Cavendish were standing facingeach other and they were evidently quarrelling. And quite asevidently they were unaware of my vicinity for before I could move orspeak John repeated the words which had aroused me from my dream.I tell you Mary I wont have it.Marys voice came cool and liquidHave you any right to criticize my actionsIt will be the talk of the village My mother was only buried onSaturday and here you are gadding about with the fellow.Oh she shrugged her shoulders if it is only village gossip thatyou mindBut it isnt. Ive had enough of the fellow hanging about. Hes aPolish Jew anyway.A tinge of Jewish blood is not a bad thing. It leavens theshe lookedat himstolid stupidity of the ordinary Englishman.Fire in her eyes ice in her voice. I did not wonder that the bloodrose to Johns face in a crimson tide.MaryWell Her tone did not change.The pleading died out of his voice.Am I to understand that you will continue to see Bauerstein against myexpress wishesIf I choose.You defy meNo but I deny your right to criticize my actions. Have you nofriends of whom I should disapproveJohn fell back a pace. The colour ebbed slowly from his face.What do you mean he said in an unsteady voice.You see said Mary quietly. You do see dont you that you haveno right to dictate to me as to the choice of my friendsJohn glanced at her pleadingly a stricken look on his face.No right Have I no right Mary he said unsteadily. He stretchedout his hands. MaryFor a moment I thought she wavered. A softer expression came over herface then suddenly she turned almost fiercely away.NoneShe was walking away when John sprang after her and caught her by thearm.Maryhis voice was very quiet noware you in love with this fellowBauersteinShe hesitated and suddenly there swept across her face a strangeexpression old as the hills yet with something eternally young aboutit. So might some Egyptian sphinx have smiled.She freed herself quietly from his arm and spoke over her shoulder.Perhaps she said and then swiftly passed out of the little gladeleaving John standing there as though he had been turned to stone.Rather ostentatiously I stepped forward crackling some dead brancheswith my feet as I did so. John turned. Luckily he took it for grantedthat I had only just come upon the scene.Hullo Hastings. Have you seen the little fellow safely back to hiscottage Quaint little chap Is he any good though reallyHe was considered one of the finest detectives of his day.Oh well I suppose there must be something in it then. What a rottenworld it is thoughYou find it so I asked.Good Lord yes Theres this terrible business to start with. ScotlandYard men in and out of the house like a jackinthebox Never knowwhere they wont turn up next. Screaming headlines in every paper inthe countrydamn all journalists I say Do you know there was a wholecrowd staring in at the lodge gates this morning. Sort of MadameTussauds chamber of horrors business that can be seen for nothing.Pretty thick isnt itCheer up John I said soothingly. It cant last for ever.Cant it though It can last long enough for us never to be able tohold up our heads again.No no youre getting morbid on the subject.Enough to make a man morbid to be stalked by beastly journalists andstared at by gaping moonfaced idiots wherever he goes But theresworse than that.WhatJohn lowered his voiceHave you ever thought Hastingsits a nightmare to mewho did it Icant help feeling sometimes it must have been an accident.Becausebecausewho could have done it Now Inglethorps out of theway theres no one else no one I mean exceptone of us.Yes indeed that was nightmare enough for any man One of us Yessurely it must be so unlessA new idea suggested itself to my mind. Rapidly I considered it. Thelight increased. Poirots mysterious doings his hintsthey all fittedin. Fool that I was not to have thought of this possibility before andwhat a relief for us all.No John I said it isnt one of us. How could it beI know but still who else is thereCant you guessNo.I looked cautiously round and lowered my voice.Dr. Bauerstein I whispered.ImpossibleNot at all.But what earthly interest could he have in my mothers deathThat I dont see I confessed but Ill tell you this Poirot thinksso.Poirot Does he How do you knowI told him of Poirots intense excitement on hearing that Dr.Bauerstein had been at Styles on the fatal night and addedHe said twice That alters everything. And Ive been thinking. Youknow Inglethorp said he had put down the coffee in the hall Well itwas just then that Bauerstein arrived. Isnt it possible that asInglethorp brought him through the hall the doctor dropped somethinginto the coffee in passingHm said John. It would have been very risky.Yes but it was possible.And then how could he know it was her coffee No old fellow I dontthink that will wash.But I had remembered something else.Youre quite right. That wasnt how it was done. Listen. And I thentold him of the cocoa sample which Poirot had taken to be analysed.John interrupted just as I had done.But look here Bauerstein had had it analysed alreadyYes yes thats the point. I didnt see it either until now. Dontyou understand Bauerstein had it analysedthats just it IfBauersteins the murderer nothing could be simpler than for him tosubstitute some ordinary cocoa for his sample and send that to betested. And of course they would find no strychnine But no one woulddream of suspecting Bauerstein or think of taking anothersampleexcept Poirot I added with belated recognition.Yes but what about the bitter taste that cocoa wont disguiseWell weve only his word for that. And there are other possibilities.Hes admittedly one of the worlds greatest toxicologistsOne of the worlds greatest what Say it again.He knows more about poisons than almost anybody I explained. Wellmy idea is that perhaps hes found some way of making strychninetasteless. Or it may not have been strychnine at all but some obscuredrug no one has ever heard of which produces much the same symptoms.Hm yes that might be said John. But look here how could he havegot at the cocoa That wasnt downstairsNo it wasnt I admitted reluctantly.And then suddenly a dreadful possibility flashed through my mind. Ihoped and prayed it would not occur to John also. I glanced sideways athim. He was frowning perplexedly and I drew a deep breath of relieffor the terrible thought that had flashed across my mind was this thatDr. Bauerstein might have had an accomplice.Yet surely it could not be Surely no woman as beautiful as MaryCavendish could be a murderess. Yet beautiful women had been known topoison.And suddenly I remembered that first conversation at tea on the day ofmy arrival and the gleam in her eyes as she had said that poison was awomans weapon. How agitated she had been on that fatal Tuesdayevening Had Mrs. Inglethorp discovered something between her andBauerstein and threatened to tell her husband Was it to stop thatdenunciation that the crime had been committedThen I remembered that enigmatical conversation between Poirot andEvelyn Howard. Was this what they had meant Was this the monstrouspossibility that Evelyn had tried not to believeYes it all fitted in.No wonder Miss Howard had suggested hushing it up. Now I understoodthat unfinished sentence of hers Emily herself And in my heart Iagreed with her. Would not Mrs. Inglethorp have preferred to gounavenged rather than have such terrible dishonour fall upon the nameof Cavendish.Theres another thing said John suddenly and the unexpected soundof his voice made me start guiltily. Something which makes me doubt ifwhat you say can be true.Whats that I asked thankful that he had gone away from the subjectof how the poison could have been introduced into the cocoa.Why the fact that Bauerstein demanded a postmortem. He neednt havedone so. Little Wilkins would have been quite content to let it go atheart disease.Yes I said doubtfully. But we dont know. Perhaps he thought itsafer in the long run. Someone might have talked afterwards. Then theHome Office might have ordered exhumation. The whole thing would havecome out then and he would have been in an awkward position for noone would have believed that a man of his reputation could have beendeceived into calling it heart disease.Yes thats possible admitted John. Still he added Im blest ifI can see what his motive could have been.I trembled.Look here I said I may be altogether wrong. And remember allthis is in confidence.Oh of coursethat goes without saying.We had walked as we talked and now we passed through the little gateinto the garden. Voices rose near at hand for tea was spread out underthe sycamoretree as it had been on the day of my arrival.Cynthia was back from the hospital and I placed my chair beside herand told her of Poirots wish to visit the dispensary.Of course Id love him to see it. Hed better come to tea there oneday. I must fix it up with him. Hes such a dear little man But heis funny. He made me take the brooch out of my tie the other day andput it in again because he said it wasnt straight.I laughed.Its quite a mania with him.Yes isnt itWe were silent for a minute or two and then glancing in the directionof Mary Cavendish and dropping her voice Cynthia saidMr. Hastings.YesAfter tea I want to talk to you.Her glance at Mary had set me thinking. I fancied that between thesetwo there existed very little sympathy. For the first time it occurredto me to wonder about the girls future. Mrs. Inglethorp had made noprovisions of any kind for her but I imagined that John and Mary wouldprobably insist on her making her home with themat any rate until theend of the war. John I knew was very fond of her and would be sorryto let her go.John who had gone into the house now reappeared. His goodnaturedface wore an unaccustomed frown of anger.Confound those detectives I cant think what theyre after Theyvebeen in every room in the houseturning things inside out and upsidedown. It really is too bad I suppose they took advantage of our allbeing out. I shall go for that fellow Japp when I next see himLot of Paul Prys grunted Miss Howard.Lawrence opined that they had to make a show of doing something.Mary Cavendish said nothing.After tea I invited Cynthia to come for a walk and we sauntered offinto the woods together.Well I inquired as soon as we were protected from prying eyes bythe leafy screen.With a sigh Cynthia flung herself down and tossed off her hat. Thesunlight piercing through the branches turned the auburn of her hairto quivering gold.Mr. Hastingsyou are always so kind and you know such a lot.It struck me at this moment that Cynthia was really a very charminggirl Much more charming than Mary who never said things of that kind.Well I asked benignantly as she hesitated.I want to ask your advice. What shall I doDoYes. You see Aunt Emily always told me I should be provided for. Isuppose she forgot or didnt think she was likely to dieanyway I amnot provided for And I dont know what to do. Do you think I oughtto go away from here at onceGood heavens no They dont want to part with you Im sure.Cynthia hesitated a moment plucking up the grass with her tiny hands.Then she said Mrs. Cavendish does. She hates me.Hates you I cried astonished.Cynthia nodded.Yes. I dont know why but she cant bear me and he cant either.There I know youre wrong I said warmly. On the contrary John isvery fond of you.Oh yesJohn. I meant Lawrence. Not of course that I care whetherLawrence hates me or not. Still its rather horrid when no one lovesyou isnt itBut they do Cynthia dear I said earnestly. Im sure you aremistaken. Look there is Johnand Miss HowardCynthia nodded rather gloomily. Yes John likes me I think and ofcourse Evie for all her gruff ways wouldnt be unkind to a fly. ButLawrence never speaks to me if he can help it and Mary can hardlybring herself to be civil to me. She wants Evie to stay on is beggingher to but she doesnt want me andandI dont know what to do.Suddenly the poor child burst out crying.I dont know what possessed me. Her beauty perhaps as she sat therewith the sunlight glinting down on her head perhaps the sense ofrelief at encountering someone who so obviously could have noconnection with the tragedy perhaps honest pity for her youth andloneliness. Anyway I leant forward and taking her little hand I saidawkwardlyMarry me Cynthia.Unwittingly I had hit upon a sovereign remedy for her tears. She satup at once drew her hand away and said with some asperityDont be sillyI was a little annoyed.Im not being silly. I am asking you to do me the honour of becomingmy wife.To my intense surprise Cynthia burst out laughing and called me afunny dear.Its perfectly sweet of you she said but you know you dont wanttoYes I do. Ive gotNever mind what youve got. You dont really want toand I donteither.Well of course that settles it I said stiffly. But I dont seeanything to laugh at. Theres nothing funny about a proposal.No indeed said Cynthia. Somebody might accept you next time.Goodbye youve cheered me up very much.And with a final uncontrollable burst of merriment she vanishedthrough the trees.Thinking over the interview it struck me as being profoundlyunsatisfactory.It occurred to me suddenly that I would go down to the village andlook up Bauerstein. Somebody ought to be keeping an eye on the fellow.At the same time it would be wise to allay any suspicions he mighthave as to his being suspected. I remembered how Poirot had relied onmy diplomacy. Accordingly I went to the little house with theApartments card inserted in the window where I knew he lodged andtapped on the door.An old woman came and opened it.Good afternoon I said pleasantly. Is Dr. Bauerstein inShe stared at me.Havent you heardHeard whatAbout him.What about himHes took.Took DeadNo took by the perlice.By the police I gasped. Do you mean theyve arrested himYes thats it andI waited to hear no more but tore up the village to find Poirot.CHAPTER X.THE ARRESTTo my extreme annoyance Poirot was not in and the old Belgian whoanswered my knock informed me that he believed he had gone to London.I was dumbfounded. What on earth could Poirot be doing in London Wasit a sudden decision on his part or had he already made up his mindwhen he parted from me a few hours earlierI retraced my steps to Styles in some annoyance. With Poirot away Iwas uncertain how to act. Had he foreseen this arrest Had he not inall probability been the cause of it Those questions I could notresolve. But in the meantime what was I to do Should I announce thearrest openly at Styles or not Though I did not acknowledge it tomyself the thought of Mary Cavendish was weighing on me. Would it notbe a terrible shock to her For the moment I set aside utterly anysuspicions of her. She could not be implicatedotherwise I should haveheard some hint of it.Of course there was no possibility of being able permanently toconceal Dr. Bauersteins arrest from her. It would be announced inevery newspaper on the morrow. Still I shrank from blurting it out. Ifonly Poirot had been accessible I could have asked his advice. Whatpossessed him to go posting off to London in this unaccountable wayIn spite of myself my opinion of his sagacity was immeasurablyheightened. I would never have dreamt of suspecting the doctor had notPoirot put it into my head. Yes decidedly the little man was clever.After some reflecting I decided to take John into my confidence andleave him to make the matter public or not as he thought fit.He gave vent to a prodigious whistle as I imparted the news.Great Scott You were right then. I couldnt believe it at thetime.No it is astonishing until you get used to the idea and see how itmakes everything fit in. Now what are we to do Of course it will begenerally known tomorrow.John reflected.Never mind he said at last we wont say anything at present. Thereis no need. As you say it will be known soon enough.But to my intense surprise on getting down early the next morning andeagerly opening the newspapers there was not a word about the arrestThere was a column of mere padding about The Styles Poisoning Casebut nothing further. It was rather inexplicable but I supposed thatfor some reason or other Japp wished to keep it out of the papers. Itworried me just a little for it suggested the possibility that theremight be further arrests to come.After breakfast I decided to go down to the village and see if Poirothad returned yet but before I could start a wellknown face blockedone of the windows and the wellknown voice saidBonjour mon amiPoirot I exclaimed with relief and seizing him by both hands Idragged him into the room. I was never so glad to see anyone. ListenI have said nothing to anybody but John. Is that rightMy friend replied Poirot I do not know what you are talkingabout.Dr. Bauersteins arrest of course I answered impatiently.Is Bauerstein arrested thenDid you not know itNot the least in the world. But pausing a moment he added Stillit does not surprise me. After all we are only four miles from thecoast.The coast I asked puzzled. What has that got to do with itPoirot shrugged his shoulders.Surely it is obviousNot to me. No doubt I am very dense but I cannot see what theproximity of the coast has got to do with the murder of Mrs.Inglethorp.Nothing at all of course replied Poirot smiling. But we werespeaking of the arrest of Dr. Bauerstein.Well he is arrested for the murder of Mrs. InglethorpWhat cried Poirot in apparently lively astonishment. Dr.Bauerstein arrested for the murder of Mrs. InglethorpYes.Impossible That would be too good a farce Who told you that myfriendWell no one exactly told me I confessed. But he is arrested.Oh yes very likely. But for espionage mon ami.Espionage I gasped.Precisely.Not for poisoning Mrs. InglethorpNot unless our friend Japp has taken leave of his senses repliedPoirot placidly.Butbut I thought you thought so tooPoirot gave me one look which conveyed a wondering pity and his fullsense of the utter absurdity of such an idea.Do you mean to say I asked slowly adapting myself to the new ideathat Dr. Bauerstein is a spyPoirot nodded.Have you never suspected itIt never entered my head.It did not strike you as peculiar that a famous London doctor shouldbury himself in a little village like this and should be in the habitof walking about at all hours of the night fully dressedNo I confessed I never thought of such a thing.He is of course a German by birth said Poirot thoughtfullythough he has practised so long in this country that nobody thinks ofhim as anything but an Englishman. He was naturalized about fifteenyears ago. A very clever mana Jew of course.The blackguard I cried indignantly.Not at all. He is on the contrary a patriot. Think what he stands tolose. I admire the man myself.But I could not look at it in Poirots philosophical way.And this is the man with whom Mrs. Cavendish has been wandering aboutall over the country I cried indignantly.Yes. I should fancy he had found her very useful remarked Poirot.So long as gossip busied itself in coupling their names together anyother vagaries of the doctors passed unobserved.Then you think he never really cared for her I asked eagerlyrathertoo eagerly perhaps under the circumstances.That of course I cannot say butshall I tell you my own privateopinion HastingsYes.Well it is this that Mrs. Cavendish does not care and never hascared one little jot about Dr. BauersteinDo you really think so I could not disguise my pleasure.I am quite sure of it. And I will tell you why.YesBecause she cares for someone else mon ami.Oh What did he mean In spite of myself an agreeable warmth spreadover me. I am not a vain man where women are concerned but Iremembered certain evidences too lightly thought of at the timeperhaps but which certainly seemed to indicateMy pleasing thoughts were interrupted by the sudden entrance of MissHoward. She glanced round hastily to make sure there was no one else inthe room and quickly produced an old sheet of brown paper. This shehanded to Poirot murmuring as she did so the cryptic wordsOn top of the wardrobe. Then she hurriedly left the room.Poirot unfolded the sheet of paper eagerly and uttered an exclamationof satisfaction. He spread it out on the table.Come here Hastings. Now tell me what is that initialJ. or L.It was a medium sized sheet of paper rather dusty as though it hadlain by for some time. But it was the label that was attractingPoirots attention. At the top it bore the printed stamp of Messrs.Parksons the wellknown theatrical costumiers and it was addressedto the debatable initial Cavendish Esq. Styles Court Styles St.Mary Essex.It might be T. or it might be L. I said after studying the thingfor a minute or two. It certainly isnt a J.Good replied Poirot folding up the paper again. I also am ofyour way of thinking. It is an L. depend upon itWhere did it come from I asked curiously. Is it importantModerately so. It confirms a surmise of mine. Having deduced itsexistence I set Miss Howard to search for it and as you see she hasbeen successful.What did she mean by On the top of the wardrobeShe meant replied Poirot promptly that she found it on top of awardrobe.A funny place for a piece of brown paper I mused.Not at all. The top of a wardrobe is an excellent place for brownpaper and cardboard boxes. I have kept them there myself. Neatlyarranged there is nothing to offend the eye.Poirot I asked earnestly have you made up your mind about thiscrimeYesthat is to say I believe I know how it was committed.AhUnfortunately I have no proof beyond my surmise unless Withsudden energy he caught me by the arm and whirled me down the hallcalling out in French in his excitement Mademoiselle DorcasMademoiselle Dorcas un moment sil vous plaîtDorcas quite flurried by the noise came hurrying out of the pantry.My good Dorcas I have an ideaa little ideaif it should provejustified what magnificent chance Tell me on Monday not TuesdayDorcas but Monday the day before the tragedy did anything go wrongwith Mrs. Inglethorps bellDorcas looked very surprised.Yes sir now you mention it it did though I dont know how you cameto hear of it. A mouse or some such must have nibbled the wirethrough. The man came and put it right on Tuesday morning.With a long drawn exclamation of ecstasy Poirot led the way back tothe morningroom.See you one should not ask for outside proofno reason should beenough. But the flesh is weak it is consolation to find that one is onthe right track. Ah my friend I am like a giant refreshed. I run IleapAnd in very truth run and leap he did gambolling wildly down thestretch of lawn outside the long window.What is your remarkable little friend doing asked a voice behind meand I turned to find Mary Cavendish at my elbow. She smiled and so didI. What is it all aboutReally I cant tell you. He asked Dorcas some question about a belland appeared so delighted with her answer that he is capering about asyou seeMary laughed.How ridiculous Hes going out of the gate. Isnt he coming backtodayI dont know. Ive given up trying to guess what hell do next.Is he quite mad Mr. HastingsI honestly dont know. Sometimes I feel sure he is as mad as ahatter and then just as he is at his maddest I find there is methodin his madness.I see.In spite of her laugh Mary was looking thoughtful this morning. Sheseemed grave almost sad.It occurred to me that it would be a good opportunity to tackle her onthe subject of Cynthia. I began rather tactfully I thought but Ihad not gone far before she stopped me authoritatively.You are an excellent advocate I have no doubt Mr. Hastings but inthis case your talents are quite thrown away. Cynthia will run no riskof encountering any unkindness from me.I began to stammer feebly that I hoped she hadnt thought But againshe stopped me and her words were so unexpected that they quite droveCynthia and her troubles out of my mind.Mr. Hastings she said do you think I and my husband are happytogetherI was considerably taken aback and murmured something about its notbeing my business to think anything of the sort.Well she said quietly whether it is your business or not I willtell you that we are not happy.I said nothing for I saw that she had not finished.She began slowly walking up and down the room her head a little bentand that slim supple figure of hers swaying gently as she walked. Shestopped suddenly and looked up at me.You dont know anything about me do you she asked. Where I comefrom who I was before I married Johnanything in fact Well I willtell you. I will make a father confessor of you. You are kind Ithinkyes I am sure you are kind.Somehow I was not quite as elated as I might have been. I rememberedthat Cynthia had begun her confidences in much the same way. Besides afather confessor should be elderly it is not at all the role for ayoung man.My father was English said Mrs. Cavendish but my mother was aRussian.Ah I said now I understandUnderstand whatA hint of something foreigndifferentthat there has always been aboutyou.My mother was very beautiful I believe. I dont know because I neversaw her. She died when I was quite a little child. I believe there wassome tragedy connected with her deathshe took an overdose of somesleeping draught by mistake. However that may be my father wasbrokenhearted. Shortly afterwards he went into the Consular Service.Everywhere he went I went with him. When I was twentythree I hadbeen nearly all over the world. It was a splendid lifeI loved it.There was a smile on her face and her head was thrown back. She seemedliving in the memory of those old glad days.Then my father died. He left me very badly off. I had to go and livewith some old aunts in Yorkshire. She shuddered. You will understandme when I say that it was a deadly life for a girl brought up as I hadbeen. The narrowness the deadly monotony of it almost drove me mad.She paused a minute and added in a different tone And then I metJohn Cavendish.YesYou can imagine that from my aunts point of view it was a very goodmatch for me. But I can honestly say it was not this fact which weighedwith me. No he was simply a way of escape from the insufferablemonotony of my life.I said nothing and after a moment she went onDont misunderstand me. I was quite honest with him. I told him whatwas true that I liked him very much that I hoped to come to like himmore but that I was not in any way what the world calls in love withhim. He declared that that satisfied him and sowe were married.She waited a long time a little frown had gathered on her forehead.She seemed to be looking back earnestly into those past days.I thinkI am surehe cared for me at first. But I suppose we were notwell matched. Almost at once we drifted apart. Heit is not a pleasingthing for my pride but it is the truthtired of me very soon. I musthave made some murmur of dissent for she went on quickly Oh yes hedid Not that it matters nownow that weve come to the parting of theways.What do you meanShe answered quietlyI mean that I am not going to remain at Styles.You and John are not going to live hereJohn may live here but I shall not.You are going to leave himYes.But whyShe paused a long time and said at lastPerhapsbecause I want to befreeAnd as she spoke I had a sudden vision of broad spaces virgin tractsof forests untrodden landsand a realization of what freedom wouldmean to such a nature as Mary Cavendish. I seemed to see her for amoment as she was a proud wild creature as untamed by civilization assome shy bird of the hills. A little cry broke from her lipsYou dont know you dont know how this hateful place has been prisonto meI understand I said butbut dont do anything rash.Oh rash Her voice mocked at my prudence.Then suddenly I said a thing I could have bitten out my tongue forYou know that Dr. Bauerstein has been arrestedAn instant coldness passed like a mask over her face blotting out allexpression.John was so kind as to break that to me this morning.Well what do you think I asked feebly.Of whatOf the arrestWhat should I think Apparently he is a German spy so the gardenerhad told John.Her face and voice were absolutely cold and expressionless. Did shecare or did she notShe moved away a step or two and fingered one of the flower vases.These are quite dead. I must do them again. Would you mindmovingthank you Mr. Hastings. And she walked quietly past me out ofthe window with a cool little nod of dismissal.No surely she could not care for Bauerstein. No woman could act herpart with that icy unconcern.Poirot did not make his appearance the following morning and there wasno sign of the Scotland Yard men.But at lunchtime there arrived a new piece of evidenceor ratherlack of evidence. We had vainly tried to trace the fourth letter whichMrs. Inglethorp had written on the evening preceding her death. Ourefforts having been in vain we had abandoned the matter hoping thatit might turn up of itself one day. And this is just what did happenin the shape of a communication which arrived by the second post froma firm of French music publishers acknowledging Mrs. Inglethorpscheque and regretting they had been unable to trace a certain seriesof Russian folksongs. So the last hope of solving the mystery by meansof Mrs. Inglethorps correspondence on the fatal evening had to beabandoned.Just before tea I strolled down to tell Poirot of the newdisappointment but found to my annoyance that he was once more out.Gone to London againOh no monsieur he has but taken the train to Tadminster. To see ayoung ladys dispensary he said.Silly ass I ejaculated. I told him Wednesday was the one day shewasnt there Well tell him to look us up tomorrow morning willyouCertainly monsieur.But on the following day no sign of Poirot. I was getting angry. Hewas really treating us in the most cavalier fashion.After lunch Lawrence drew me aside and asked if I was going down tosee him.No I dont think I shall. He can come up here if he wants to see us.Oh Lawrence looked indeterminate. Something unusually nervous andexcited in his manner roused my curiosity.What is it I asked. I could go if theres anything special.Its nothing much butwell if you are going will you tell him hedropped his voice to a whisperI think Ive found the extracoffeecupI had almost forgotten that enigmatical message of Poirots but now mycuriosity was aroused afresh.Lawrence would say no more so I decided that I would descend from myhigh horse and once more seek out Poirot at Leastways Cottage.This time I was received with a smile. Monsieur Poirot was within.Would I mount I mounted accordingly.Poirot was sitting by the table his head buried in his hands. Hesprang up at my entrance.What is it I asked solicitously. You are not ill I trustNo no not ill. But I decide an affair of great moment.Whether to catch the criminal or not I asked facetiously.But to my great surprise Poirot nodded gravely.To speak or not to speak as your so great Shakespeare says thatis the question.I did not trouble to correct the quotation.You are not serious PoirotI am of the most serious. For the most serious of all things hangs inthe balance.And that isA womans happiness mon ami he said gravely.I did not quite know what to say.The moment has come said Poirot thoughtfully and I do not knowwhat to do. For see you it is a big stake for which I play. No onebut I Hercule Poirot would attempt it And he tapped himself proudlyon the breast.After pausing a few minutes respectfully so as not to spoil hiseffect I gave him Lawrences message.Aha he cried. So he has found the extra coffeecup. That is good.He has more intelligence than would appear this longfaced MonsieurLawrence of yoursI did not myself think very highly of Lawrences intelligence but Iforebore to contradict Poirot and gently took him to task forforgetting my instructions as to which were Cynthias days off.It is true. I have the head of a sieve. However the other young ladywas most kind. She was sorry for my disappointment and showed meeverything in the kindest way.Oh well thats all right then and you must go to tea with Cynthiaanother day.I told him about the letter.I am sorry for that he said. I always had hopes of that letter. Butno it was not to be. This affair must all be unravelled from within.He tapped his forehead. These little grey cells. It is up to themasyou say over here. Then suddenly he asked Are you a judge offingermarks my friendNo I said rather surprised I know that there are no twofingermarks alike but thats as far as my science goes.Exactly.He unlocked a little drawer and took out some photographs which helaid on the table.I have numbered them . Will you describe them to meI studied the proofs attentively.All greatly magnified I see. No. I should say are a mansfingerprints thumb and first finger. No. are a ladys they aremuch smaller and quite different in every way. No. I paused forsome timethere seem to be a lot of confused fingermarks but herevery distinctly are No. s.Overlapping the othersYes.You recognize them beyond failOh yes they are identical.Poirot nodded and gently taking the photographs from me locked them upagain.I suppose I said that as usual you are not going to explainOn the contrary. No. were the fingerprints of Monsieur Lawrence.No. were those of Mademoiselle Cynthia. They are not important. Imerely obtained them for comparison. No. is a little morecomplicated.YesIt is as you see highly magnified. You may have noticed a sort ofblur extending all across the picture. I will not describe to you thespecial apparatus dusting powder etc. which I used. It is awellknown process to the police and by means of it you can obtain aphotograph of the fingerprints of any object in a very short space oftime. Well my friend you have seen the fingermarksit remains totell you the particular object on which they had been left.Go onI am really excited.Eh bien Photo No. represents the highly magnified surface of atiny bottle in the top poison cupboard of the dispensary in the RedCross Hospital at Tadminsterwhich sounds like the house that JackbuiltGood heavens I exclaimed. But what were Lawrence Cavendishsfingermarks doing on it He never went near the poison cupboard theday we were thereOh yes he didImpossible We were all together the whole time.Poirot shook his head.No my friend there was a moment when you were not all together.There was a moment when you could not have been all together or itwould not have been necessary to call to Monsieur Lawrence to come andjoin you on the balcony.Id forgotten that I admitted. But it was only for a moment.Long enough.Long enough for whatPoirots smile became rather enigmatical.Long enough for a gentleman who had once studied medicine to gratify avery natural interest and curiosity.Our eyes met. Poirots were pleasantly vague. He got up and hummed alittle tune. I watched him suspiciously.Poirot I said what was in this particular little bottlePoirot looked out of the window.Hydrochloride of strychnine he said over his shoulder continuingto hum.Good heavens I said it quite quietly. I was not surprised. I hadexpected that answer.They use the pure hydrochloride of strychnine very littleonlyoccasionally for pills. It is the official solution Liq. StrychnineHydroclor. that is used in most medicines. That is why thefingermarks have remained undisturbed since then.How did you manage to take this photographI dropped my hat from the balcony explained Poirot simply. Visitorswere not permitted below at that hour so in spite of my manyapologies Mademoiselle Cynthias colleague had to go down and fetch itfor me.Then you knew what you were going to findNo not at all. I merely realized that it was possible from yourstory for Monsieur Lawrence to go to the poison cupboard. Thepossibility had to be confirmed or eliminated.Poirot I said your gaiety does not deceive me. This is a veryimportant discovery.I do not know said Poirot. But one thing does strike me. No doubtit has struck you too.What is thatWhy that there is altogether too much strychnine about this case.This is the third time we run up against it. There was strychnine inMrs. Inglethorps tonic. There is the strychnine sold across thecounter at Styles St. Mary by Mace. Now we have more strychninehandled by one of the household. It is confusing and as you know Ido not like confusion.Before I could reply one of the other Belgians opened the door andstuck his head in.There is a lady below asking for Mr Hastings.A ladyI jumped up. Poirot followed me down the narrow stairs. Mary Cavendishwas standing in the doorway.I have been visiting an old woman in the village she explained andas Lawrence told me you were with Monsieur Poirot I thought I wouldcall for you.Alas madame said Poirot I thought you had come to honour me witha visitI will some day if you ask me she promised him smiling.That is well. If you should need a father confessor madameshestarted ever so slightlyremember Papa Poirot is always at yourservice.She stared at him for a few minutes as though seeking to read somedeeper meaning into his words. Then she turned abruptly away.Come will you not walk back with us too Monsieur PoirotEnchanted madame.All the way to Styles Mary talked fast and feverishly. It struck methat in some way she was nervous of Poirots eyes.The weather had broken and the sharp wind was almost autumnal in itsshrewishness. Mary shivered a little and buttoned her black sportscoat closer. The wind through the trees made a mournful noise likesome great giant sighing.We walked up to the great door of Styles and at once the knowledgecame to us that something was wrong.Dorcas came running out to meet us. She was crying and wringing herhands. I was aware of other servants huddled together in thebackground all eyes and ears.Oh mam Oh mam I dont know how to tell youWhat is it Dorcas I asked impatiently. Tell us at once.Its those wicked detectives. Theyve arrested himtheyve arrestedMr. CavendishArrested Lawrence I gasped.I saw a strange look come into Dorcass eyes.No sir. Not Mr. LawrenceMr. John.Behind me with a wild cry Mary Cavendish fell heavily against me andas I turned to catch her I met the quiet triumph in Poirots eyes.CHAPTER XI.THE CASE FOR THE PROSECUTIONThe trial of John Cavendish for the murder of his stepmother took placetwo months later.Of the intervening weeks I will say little but my admiration andsympathy went out unfeignedly to Mary Cavendish. She ranged herselfpassionately on her husbands side scorning the mere idea of hisguilt and fought for him tooth and nail.I expressed my admiration to Poirot and he nodded thoughtfully.Yes she is of those women who show at their best in adversity. Itbrings out all that is sweetest and truest in them. Her pride and herjealousy haveJealousy I queried.Yes. Have you not realized that she is an unusually jealous woman AsI was saying her pride and jealousy have been laid aside. She thinksof nothing but her husband and the terrible fate that is hanging overhim.He spoke very feelingly and I looked at him earnestly rememberingthat last afternoon when he had been deliberating whether or not tospeak. With his tenderness for a womans happiness I felt glad thatthe decision had been taken out of his hands.Even now I said I can hardly believe it. You see up to the verylast minute I thought it was LawrencePoirot grinned.I know you did.But John My old friend JohnEvery murderer is probably somebodys old friend observed Poirotphilosophically. You cannot mix up sentiment and reason.I must say I think you might have given me a hint.Perhaps mon ami I did not do so just because he was your oldfriend.I was rather disconcerted by this remembering how I had busily passedon to John what I believed to be Poirots views concerning Bauerstein.He by the way had been acquitted of the charge brought against him.Nevertheless although he had been too clever for them this time andthe charge of espionage could not be brought home to him his wingswere pretty well clipped for the future.I asked Poirot whether he thought John would be condemned. To myintense surprise he replied that on the contrary he was extremelylikely to be acquitted.But Poirot I protested.Oh my friend have I not said to you all along that I have no proofs.It is one thing to know that a man is guilty it is quite anothermatter to prove him so. And in this case there is terribly littleevidence. That is the whole trouble. I Hercule Poirot know but Ilack the last link in my chain. And unless I can find that missinglink He shook his head gravely.When did you first suspect John Cavendish I asked after a minute ortwo.Did you not suspect him at allNo indeed.Not after that fragment of conversation you overheard between Mrs.Cavendish and her motherinlaw and her subsequent lack of franknessat the inquestNo.Did you not put two and two together and reflect that if it was notAlfred Inglethorp who was quarrelling with his wifeand you rememberhe strenuously denied it at the inquestit must be either Lawrence orJohn. Now if it was Lawrence Mary Cavendishs conduct was just asinexplicable. But if on the other hand it was John the whole thingwas explained quite naturally.So I cried a light breaking in upon me it was John who quarrelledwith his mother that afternoonExactly.And you have known this all alongCertainly. Mrs. Cavendishs behaviour could only be explained thatway.And yet you say he may be acquittedPoirot shrugged his shoulders.Certainly I do. At the police court proceedings we shall hear thecase for the prosecution but in all probability his solicitors willadvise him to reserve his defence. That will be sprung upon us at thetrial. Andah by the way I have a word of caution to give you myfriend. I must not appear in the case.WhatNo. Officially I have nothing to do with it. Until I have found thatlast link in my chain I must remain behind the scenes. Mrs. Cavendishmust think I am working for her husband not against him.I say thats playing it a bit low down I protested.Not at all. We have to deal with a most clever and unscrupulous manand we must use any means in our powerotherwise he will slip throughour fingers. That is why I have been careful to remain in thebackground. All the discoveries have been made by Japp and Japp willtake all the credit. If I am called upon to give evidence at allhesmiled broadlyit will probably be as a witness for the defence.I could hardly believe my ears.It is quite en règle continued Poirot. Strangely enough I cangive evidence that will demolish one contention of the prosecution.Which oneThe one that relates to the destruction of the will. John Cavendishdid not destroy that will.Poirot was a true prophet. I will not go into the details of the policecourt proceedings as it involves many tiresome repetitions. I willmerely state baldly that John Cavendish reserved his defence and wasduly committed for trial.September found us all in London. Mary took a house in KensingtonPoirot being included in the family party.I myself had been given a job at the War Office so was able to seethem continually.As the weeks went by the state of Poirots nerves grew worse andworse. That last link he talked about was still lacking. Privately Ihoped it might remain so for what happiness could there be for Maryif John were not acquittedOn September th John Cavendish appeared in the dock at the OldBailey charged with The Wilful Murder of Emily Agnes Inglethorp andpleaded Not Guilty.Sir Ernest Heavywether the famous K.C. had been engaged to defendhim.Mr. Philips K.C. opened the case for the Crown.The murder he said was a most premeditated and coldblooded one. Itwas neither more nor less than the deliberate poisoning of a fond andtrusting woman by the stepson to whom she had been more than a mother.Ever since his boyhood she had supported him. He and his wife hadlived at Styles Court in every luxury surrounded by her care andattention. She had been their kind and generous benefactress.He proposed to call witnesses to show how the prisoner a profligateand spendthrift had been at the end of his financial tether and hadalso been carrying on an intrigue with a certain Mrs. Raikes aneighbouring farmers wife. This having come to his stepmothers earsshe taxed him with it on the afternoon before her death and a quarrelensued part of which was overheard. On the previous day the prisonerhad purchased strychnine at the village chemists shop wearing adisguise by means of which he hoped to throw the onus of the crime uponanother manto wit Mrs. Inglethorps husband of whom he had beenbitterly jealous. Luckily for Mr. Inglethorp he had been able toproduce an unimpeachable alibi.On the afternoon of July th continued Counsel immediately after thequarrel with her son Mrs. Inglethorp made a new will. This will wasfound destroyed in the grate of her bedroom the following morning butevidence had come to light which showed that it had been drawn up infavour of her husband. Deceased had already made a will in his favourbefore her marriage butand Mr. Philips wagged an expressiveforefingerthe prisoner was not aware of that. What had induced thedeceased to make a fresh will with the old one still extant he couldnot say. She was an old lady and might possibly have forgotten theformer one orthis seemed to him more likelyshe may have had an ideathat it was revoked by her marriage as there had been someconversation on the subject. Ladies were not always very well versed inlegal knowledge. She had about a year before executed a will infavour of the prisoner. He would call evidence to show that it was theprisoner who ultimately handed his stepmother her coffee on the fatalnight. Later in the evening he had sought admission to her room onwhich occasion no doubt he found an opportunity of destroying thewill which as far as he knew would render the one in his favourvalid.The prisoner had been arrested in consequence of the discovery in hisroom by Detective Inspector Jappa most brilliant officerof theidentical phial of strychnine which had been sold at the villagechemists to the supposed Mr. Inglethorp on the day before the murder.It would be for the jury to decide whether or not these damning factsconstituted an overwhelming proof of the prisoners guilt.And subtly implying that a jury which did not so decide was quiteunthinkable Mr. Philips sat down and wiped his forehead.The first witnesses for the prosecution were mostly those who had beencalled at the inquest the medical evidence being again taken first.Sir Ernest Heavywether who was famous all over England for theunscrupulous manner in which he bullied witnesses only asked twoquestions.I take it Dr. Bauerstein that strychnine as a drug acts quicklyYes.And that you are unable to account for the delay in this caseYes.Thank you.Mr. Mace identified the phial handed him by Counsel as that sold by himto Mr. Inglethorp. Pressed he admitted that he only knew Mr.Inglethorp by sight. He had never spoken to him. The witness was notcrossexamined.Alfred Inglethorp was called and denied having purchased the poison.He also denied having quarrelled with his wife. Various witnessestestified to the accuracy of these statements.The gardeners evidence as to the witnessing of the will was takenand then Dorcas was called.Dorcas faithful to her young gentlemen denied strenuously that itcould have been Johns voice she heard and resolutely declared in theteeth of everything that it was Mr. Inglethorp who had been in theboudoir with her mistress. A rather wistful smile passed across theface of the prisoner in the dock. He knew only too well how useless hergallant defiance was since it was not the object of the defence todeny this point. Mrs. Cavendish of course could not be called upon togive evidence against her husband.After various questions on other matters Mr. Philips askedIn the month of June last do you remember a parcel arriving for Mr.Lawrence Cavendish from ParksonsDorcas shook her head.I dont remember sir. It may have done but Mr. Lawrence was awayfrom home part of June.In the event of a parcel arriving for him whilst he was away whatwould be done with itIt would either be put in his room or sent on after him.By youNo sir I should leave it on the hall table. It would be Miss Howardwho would attend to anything like that.Evelyn Howard was called and after being examined on other points wasquestioned as to the parcel.Dont remember. Lots of parcels come. Cant remember one special one.You do not know if it was sent after Mr. Lawrence Cavendish to Walesor whether it was put in his roomDont think it was sent after him. Should have remembered it if itwas.Supposing a parcel arrived addressed to Mr. Lawrence Cavendish andafterwards it disappeared should you remark its absenceNo dont think so. I should think someone had taken charge of it.I believe Miss Howard that it was you who found this sheet of brownpaper He held up the same dusty piece which Poirot and I had examinedin the morningroom at Styles.Yes I did.How did you come to look for itThe Belgian detective who was employed on the case asked me to searchfor it.Where did you eventually discover itOn the top ofofa wardrobe.On top of the prisoners wardrobeII believe so.Did you not find it yourselfYes.Then you must know where you found itYes it was on the prisoners wardrobe.That is better.An assistant from Parksons Theatrical Costumiers testified that onJune th they had supplied a black beard to Mr. L. Cavendish asrequested. It was ordered by letter and a postal order was enclosed.No they had not kept the letter. All transactions were entered intheir books. They had sent the beard as directed to L. CavendishEsq. Styles Court.Sir Ernest Heavywether rose ponderously.Where was the letter written fromFrom Styles Court.The same address to which you sent the parcelYes.And the letter came from thereYes.Like a beast of prey Heavywether fell upon himHow do you knowII dont understand.How do you know that letter came from Styles Did you notice thepostmarkNobutAh you did not notice the postmark And yet you affirm soconfidently that it came from Styles. It might in fact have been anypostmarkYes.In fact the letter though written on stamped notepaper might havebeen posted from anywhere From Wales for instanceThe witness admitted that such might be the case and Sir Ernestsignified that he was satisfied.Elizabeth Wells second housemaid at Styles stated that after she hadgone to bed she remembered that she had bolted the front door insteadof leaving it on the latch as Mr. Inglethorp had requested. She hadaccordingly gone downstairs again to rectify her error. Hearing aslight noise in the West wing she had peeped along the passage andhad seen Mr. John Cavendish knocking at Mrs. Inglethorps door.Sir Ernest Heavywether made short work of her and under his unmercifulbullying she contradicted herself hopelessly and Sir Ernest sat downagain with a satisfied smile on his face.With the evidence of Annie as to the candle grease on the floor andas to seeing the prisoner take the coffee into the boudoir theproceedings were adjourned until the following day.As we went home Mary Cavendish spoke bitterly against the prosecutingcounsel.That hateful man What a net he has drawn around my poor John How hetwisted every little fact until he made it seem what it wasntWell I said consolingly it will be the other way about tomorrow.Yes she said meditatively then suddenly dropped her voice. Mr.Hastings you do not thinksurely it could not have been LawrenceOhno that could not beBut I myself was puzzled and as soon as I was alone with Poirot Iasked him what he thought Sir Ernest was driving at.Ah said Poirot appreciatively. He is a clever man that SirErnest.Do you think he believes Lawrence guiltyI do not think he believes or cares anything No what he is tryingfor is to create such confusion in the minds of the jury that they aredivided in their opinion as to which brother did it. He is endeavouringto make out that there is quite as much evidence against Lawrence asagainst Johnand I am not at all sure that he will not succeed.Detectiveinspector Japp was the first witness called when the trialwas reopened and gave his evidence succinctly and briefly. Afterrelating the earlier events he proceededActing on information received Superintendent Summerhaye and myselfsearched the prisoners room during his temporary absence from thehouse. In his chest of drawers hidden beneath some underclothing wefound first a pair of goldrimmed pincenez similar to those worn byMr. Inglethorpthese were exhibitedsecondly this phial.The phial was that already recognized by the chemists assistant atiny bottle of blue glass containing a few grains of a whitecrystalline powder and labelled Strychnine Hydrochloride. POISON.A fresh piece of evidence discovered by the detectives since the policecourt proceedings was a long almost new piece of blottingpaper. Ithad been found in Mrs. Inglethorps cheque book and on being reversedat a mirror showed clearly the words . . . erything of which I diepossessed I leave to my beloved husband Alfred Ing... This placedbeyond question the fact that the destroyed will had been in favour ofthe deceased ladys husband. Japp then produced the charred fragment ofpaper recovered from the grate and this with the discovery of thebeard in the attic completed his evidence.But Sir Ernests crossexamination was yet to come.What day was it when you searched the prisoners roomTuesday the th of July.Exactly a week after the tragedyYes.You found these two objects you say in the chest of drawers. Was thedrawer unlockedYes.Does it not strike you as unlikely that a man who had committed acrime should keep the evidence of it in an unlocked drawer for anyoneto findHe might have stowed them there in a hurry.But you have just said it was a whole week since the crime. He wouldhave had ample time to remove them and destroy them.Perhaps.There is no perhaps about it. Would he or would he not have hadplenty of time to remove and destroy themYes.Was the pile of underclothes under which the things were hidden heavyor lightHeavyish.In other words it was winter underclothing. Obviously the prisonerwould not be likely to go to that drawerPerhaps not.Kindly answer my question. Would the prisoner in the hottest week ofa hot summer be likely to go to a drawer containing winterunderclothing. Yes or noNo.In that case is it not possible that the articles in question mighthave been put there by a third person and that the prisoner was quiteunaware of their presenceI should not think it likely.But it is possibleYes.That is all.More evidence followed. Evidence as to the financial difficulties inwhich the prisoner had found himself at the end of July. Evidence as tohis intrigue with Mrs. Raikespoor Mary that must have been bitterhearing for a woman of her pride. Evelyn Howard had been right in herfacts though her animosity against Alfred Inglethorp had caused her tojump to the conclusion that he was the person concerned.Lawrence Cavendish was then put into the box. In a low voice in answerto Mr. Philips questions he denied having ordered anything fromParksons in June. In fact on June th he had been staying away inWales.Instantly Sir Ernests chin was shooting pugnaciously forward.You deny having ordered a black beard from Parksons on June thI do.Ah In the event of anything happening to your brother who willinherit Styles CourtThe brutality of the question called a flush to Lawrences pale face.The judge gave vent to a faint murmur of disapprobation and theprisoner in the dock leant forward angrily.Heavywether cared nothing for his clients anger.Answer my question if you please.I suppose said Lawrence quietly that I should.What do you mean by you suppose Your brother has no children. Youwould inherit it wouldnt youYes.Ah thats better said Heavywether with ferocious geniality. Andyoud inherit a good slice of money too wouldnt youReally Sir Ernest protested the judge these questions are notrelevant.Sir Ernest bowed and having shot his arrow proceeded.On Tuesday the th July you went I believe with another guest tovisit the dispensary at the Red Cross Hospital in TadminsterYes.Did youwhile you happened to be alone for a few secondsunlock thepoison cupboard and examine some of the bottlesIImay have done so.I put it to you that you did do soYes.Sir Ernest fairly shot the next question at him.Did you examine one bottle in particularNo I do not think so.Be careful Mr. Cavendish. I am referring to a little bottle ofHydrochloride of Strychnine.Lawrence was turning a sickly greenish colour.NoI am sure I didnt.Then how do you account for the fact that you left the unmistakableimpress of your fingerprints on itThe bullying manner was highly efficacious with a nervous disposition.II suppose I must have taken up the bottle.I suppose so too Did you abstract any of the contents of the bottleCertainly not.Then why did you take it upI once studied to be a doctor. Such things naturally interest me.Ah So poisons naturally interest you do they Still you waited tobe alone before gratifying that interest of yoursThat was pure chance. If the others had been there I should have donejust the same.Still as it happens the others were not thereNo butIn fact during the whole afternoon you were only alone for a coupleof minutes and it happenedI say it happenedto be during those twominutes that you displayed your natural interest in Hydrochloride ofStrychnineLawrence stammered pitiably.IIWith a satisfied and expressive countenance Sir Ernest observedI have nothing more to ask you Mr. Cavendish.This bit of crossexamination had caused great excitement in court. Theheads of the many fashionably attired women present were busily laidtogether and their whispers became so loud that the judge angrilythreatened to have the court cleared if there was not immediatesilence.There was little more evidence. The handwriting experts were calledupon for their opinion of the signature of Alfred Inglethorp in thechemists poison register. They all declared unanimously that it wascertainly not his handwriting and gave it as their view that it mightbe that of the prisoner disguised. Crossexamined they admitted thatit might be the prisoners handwriting cleverly counterfeited.Sir Ernest Heavywethers speech in opening the case for the defence wasnot a long one but it was backed by the full force of his emphaticmanner. Never he said in the course of his long experience had heknown a charge of murder rest on slighter evidence. Not only was itentirely circumstantial but the greater part of it was practicallyunproved. Let them take the testimony they had heard and sift itimpartially. The strychnine had been found in a drawer in theprisoners room. That drawer was an unlocked one as he had pointedout and he submitted that there was no evidence to prove that it wasthe prisoner who had concealed the poison there. It was in fact awicked and malicious attempt on the part of some third person to fixthe crime on the prisoner. The prosecution had been unable to produce ashred of evidence in support of their contention that it was theprisoner who ordered the black beard from Parksons. The quarrel whichhad taken place between prisoner and his stepmother was freelyadmitted but both it and his financial embarrassments had been grosslyexaggerated.His learned friendSir Ernest nodded carelessly at Mr. Philipshadstated that if the prisoner were an innocent man he would have comeforward at the inquest to explain that it was he and not Mr.Inglethorp who had been the participator in the quarrel. He thoughtthe facts had been misrepresented. What had actually occurred was this.The prisoner returning to the house on Tuesday evening had beenauthoritatively told that there had been a violent quarrel between Mr.and Mrs. Inglethorp. No suspicion had entered the prisoners head thatanyone could possibly have mistaken his voice for that of Mr.Inglethorp. He naturally concluded that his stepmother had had twoquarrels.The prosecution averred that on Monday July th the prisoner hadentered the chemists shop in the village disguised as Mr. Inglethorp.The prisoner on the contrary was at that time at a lonely spot calledMarstons Spinney where he had been summoned by an anonymous notecouched in blackmailing terms and threatening to reveal certainmatters to his wife unless he complied with its demands. The prisonerhad accordingly gone to the appointed spot and after waiting therevainly for half an hour had returned home. Unfortunately he had metwith no one on the way there or back who could vouch for the truth ofhis story but luckily he had kept the note and it would be producedas evidence.As for the statement relating to the destruction of the will theprisoner had formerly practised at the Bar and was perfectly wellaware that the will made in his favour a year before was automaticallyrevoked by his stepmothers remarriage. He would call evidence to showwho did destroy the will and it was possible that that might open upquite a new view of the case.Finally he would point out to the jury that there was evidence againstother people besides John Cavendish. He would direct their attention tothe fact that the evidence against Mr. Lawrence Cavendish was quite asstrong if not stronger than that against his brother.He would now call the prisoner.John acquitted himself well in the witnessbox. Under Sir Ernestsskilful handling he told his tale credibly and well. The anonymousnote received by him was produced and handed to the jury to examine.The readiness with which he admitted his financial difficulties andthe disagreement with his stepmother lent value to his denials.At the close of his examination he paused and saidI should like to make one thing clear. I utterly reject and disapproveof Sir Ernest Heavywethers insinuations against my brother. Mybrother I am convinced had no more to do with the crime than I have.Sir Ernest merely smiled and noted with a sharp eye that Johnsprotest had produced a very favourable impression on the jury.Then the crossexamination began.I understand you to say that it never entered your head that thewitnesses at the inquest could possibly have mistaken your voice forthat of Mr. Inglethorp. Is not that very surprisingNo I dont think so. I was told there had been a quarrel between mymother and Mr. Inglethorp and it never occurred to me that such wasnot really the case.Not when the servant Dorcas repeated certain fragments of theconversationfragments which you must have recognizedI did not recognize them.Your memory must be unusually shortNo but we were both angry and I think said more than we meant. Ipaid very little attention to my mothers actual words.Mr. Philips incredulous sniff was a triumph of forensic skill. Hepassed on to the subject of the note.You have produced this note very opportunely. Tell me is therenothing familiar about the handwriting of itNot that I know of.Do you not think that it bears a marked resemblance to your ownhandwritingcarelessly disguisedNo I do not think so.I put it to you that it is your own handwritingNo.I put it to you that anxious to prove an alibi you conceived theidea of a fictitious and rather incredible appointment and wrote thisnote yourself in order to bear out your statementNo.Is it not a fact that at the time you claim to have been waitingabout at a solitary and unfrequented spot you were really in thechemists shop in Styles St. Mary where you purchased strychnine inthe name of Alfred InglethorpNo that is a lie.I put it to you that wearing a suit of Mr. Inglethorps clothes witha black beard trimmed to resemble his you were thereand signed theregister in his nameThat is absolutely untrue.Then I will leave the remarkable similarity of handwriting betweenthe note the register and your own to the consideration of thejury said Mr. Philips and sat down with the air of a man who hasdone his duty but who was nevertheless horrified by such deliberateperjury.After this as it was growing late the case was adjourned till Monday.Poirot I noticed was looking profoundly discouraged. He had thatlittle frown between the eyes that I knew so well.What is it Poirot I inquired.Ah mon ami things are going badly badly.In spite of myself my heart gave a leap of relief. Evidently there wasa likelihood of John Cavendish being acquitted.When we reached the house my little friend waved aside Marys offer oftea.No I thank you madame. I will mount to my room.I followed him. Still frowning he went across to the desk and took outa small pack of patience cards. Then he drew up a chair to the tableand to my utter amazement began solemnly to build card housesMy jaw dropped involuntarily and he said at onceNo mon ami I am not in my second childhood I steady my nervesthat is all. This employment requires precision of the fingers. Withprecision of the fingers goes precision of the brain. And never have Ineeded that more than nowWhat is the trouble I asked.With a great thump on the table Poirot demolished his carefully builtup edifice.It is this mon ami That I can build card houses seven storieshigh but I cannotthumpfindthump that last link of which Ispoke to you.I could not quite tell what to say so I held my peace and he beganslowly building up the cards again speaking in jerks as he did so.It is doneso By placingone cardon anotherwithmathematicalprecisionI watched the card house rising under his hands story by story. Henever hesitated or faltered. It was really almost like a conjuringtrick.What a steady hand youve got I remarked. I believe Ive only seenyour hand shake once.On an occasion when I was enraged without doubt observed Poirotwith great placidity.Yes indeed You were in a towering rage. Do you remember It was whenyou discovered that the lock of the despatchcase in Mrs. Inglethorpsbedroom had been forced. You stood by the mantelpiece twiddling thethings on it in your usual fashion and your hand shook like a leaf Imust sayBut I stopped suddenly. For Poirot uttering a hoarse and inarticulatecry again annihilated his masterpiece of cards and putting his handsover his eyes swayed backwards and forwards apparently suffering thekeenest agony.Good heavens Poirot I cried. What is the matter Are you takenillNo no he gasped. It isit isthat I have an ideaOh I exclaimed much relieved. One of your little ideasAh ma foi no replied Poirot frankly. This time it is an ideagigantic Stupendous And youyou my friend have given it to meSuddenly clasping me in his arms he kissed me warmly on both cheeksand before I had recovered from my surprise ran headlong from the room.Mary Cavendish entered at that moment.What is the matter with Monsieur Poirot He rushed past me cryingout A garage For the love of Heaven direct me to a garage madameAnd before I could answer he had dashed out into the street.I hurried to the window. True enough there he was tearing down thestreet hatless and gesticulating as he went. I turned to Mary with agesture of despair.Hell be stopped by a policeman in another minute. There he goesround the cornerOur eyes met and we stared helplessly at one another.What can be the matterI shook my head.I dont know. He was building card houses when suddenly he said hehad an idea and rushed off as you saw.Well said Mary I expect he will be back before dinner.But night fell and Poirot had not returned.CHAPTER XII.THE LAST LINKPoirots abrupt departure had intrigued us all greatly. Sunday morningwore away and still he did not reappear. But about three oclock aferocious and prolonged hooting outside drove us to the window to seePoirot alighting from a car accompanied by Japp and Summerhaye. Thelittle man was transformed. He radiated an absurd complacency. He bowedwith exaggerated respect to Mary Cavendish.Madame I have your permission to hold a little réunion in thesalon It is necessary for everyone to attend.Mary smiled sadly.You know Monsieur Poirot that you have carte blanche in everyway.You are too amiable madame.Still beaming Poirot marshalled us all into the drawingroom bringingforward chairs as he did so.Miss Howardhere. Mademoiselle Cynthia. Monsieur Lawrence. The goodDorcas. And Annie. Bien We must delay our proceedings a few minutesuntil Mr. Inglethorp arrives. I have sent him a note.Miss Howard rose immediately from her seat.If that man comes into the house I leave itNo no Poirot went up to her and pleaded in a low voice.Finally Miss Howard consented to return to her chair. A few minuteslater Alfred Inglethorp entered the room.The company once assembled Poirot rose from his seat with the air of apopular lecturer and bowed politely to his audience.Messieurs mesdames as you all know I was called in by MonsieurJohn Cavendish to investigate this case. I at once examined the bedroomof the deceased which by the advice of the doctors had been keptlocked and was consequently exactly as it had been when the tragedyoccurred. I found first a fragment of green material second a stainon the carpet near the window still damp thirdly an empty box ofbromide powders.To take the fragment of green material first I found it caught in thebolt of the communicating door between that room and the adjoining oneoccupied by Mademoiselle Cynthia. I handed the fragment over to thepolice who did not consider it of much importance. Nor did theyrecognize it for what it wasa piece torn from a green land armlet.There was a little stir of excitement.Now there was only one person at Styles who worked on the landMrs.Cavendish. Therefore it must have been Mrs. Cavendish who entered thedeceaseds room through the door communicating with MademoiselleCynthias room.But that door was bolted on the inside I cried.When I examined the room yes. But in the first place we have only herword for it since it was she who tried that particular door andreported it fastened. In the ensuing confusion she would have had ampleopportunity to shoot the bolt across. I took an early opportunity ofverifying my conjectures. To begin with the fragment correspondsexactly with a tear in Mrs. Cavendishs armlet. Also at the inquestMrs. Cavendish declared that she had heard from her own room the fallof the table by the bed. I took an early opportunity of testing thatstatement by stationing my friend Monsieur Hastings in the left wing ofthe building just outside Mrs. Cavendishs door. I myself in companywith the police went to the deceaseds room and whilst there Iapparently accidentally knocked over the table in question but foundthat as I had expected Monsieur Hastings had heard no sound at all.This confirmed my belief that Mrs. Cavendish was not speaking the truthwhen she declared that she had been dressing in her room at the time ofthe tragedy. In fact I was convinced that far from having been in herown room Mrs. Cavendish was actually in the deceaseds room when thealarm was given.I shot a quick glance at Mary. She was very pale but smiling.I proceeded to reason on that assumption. Mrs. Cavendish is in hermotherinlaws room. We will say that she is seeking for something andhas not yet found it. Suddenly Mrs. Inglethorp awakens and is seizedwith an alarming paroxysm. She flings out her arm overturning the bedtable and then pulls desperately at the bell. Mrs. Cavendishstartled drops her candle scattering the grease on the carpet. Shepicks it up and retreats quickly to Mademoiselle Cynthias roomclosing the door behind her. She hurries out into the passage for theservants must not find her where she is. But it is too late Alreadyfootsteps are echoing along the gallery which connects the two wings.What can she do Quick as thought she hurries back to the young girlsroom and starts shaking her awake. The hastily aroused household cometrooping down the passage. They are all busily battering at Mrs.Inglethorps door. It occurs to nobody that Mrs. Cavendish has notarrived with the rest butand this is significantI can find no onewho saw her come from the other wing. He looked at Mary Cavendish. AmI right madameShe bowed her head.Quite right monsieur. You understand that if I had thought I woulddo my husband any good by revealing these facts I would have done so.But it did not seem to me to bear upon the question of his guilt orinnocence.In a sense that is correct madame. But it cleared my mind of manymisconceptions and left me free to see other facts in their truesignificance.The will cried Lawrence. Then it was you Mary who destroyed thewillShe shook her head and Poirot shook his also.No he said quietly. There is only one person who could possiblyhave destroyed that willMrs. Inglethorp herselfImpossible I exclaimed. She had only made it out that veryafternoonNevertheless mon ami it was Mrs. Inglethorp. Because in no otherway can you account for the fact that on one of the hottest days ofthe year Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire to be lighted in her room.I gave a gasp. What idiots we had been never to think of that fire asbeing incongruous Poirot was continuingThe temperature on that day messieurs was degrees in the shade.Yet Mrs. Inglethorp ordered a fire Why Because she wished to destroysomething and could think of no other way. You will remember that inconsequence of the War economics practiced at Styles no waste paperwas thrown away. There was therefore no means of destroying a thickdocument such as a will. The moment I heard of a fire being lighted inMrs. Inglethorps room I leaped to the conclusion that it was todestroy some important documentpossibly a will. So the discovery ofthe charred fragment in the grate was no surprise to me. I did not ofcourse know at the time that the will in question had only been madethis afternoon and I will admit that when I learnt that fact I fellinto a grievous error. I came to the conclusion that Mrs. Inglethorpsdetermination to destroy her will arose as a direct consequence of thequarrel she had that afternoon and that therefore the quarrel tookplace after and not before the making of the will.Here as we know I was wrong and I was forced to abandon that idea.I faced the problem from a new standpoint. Now at four oclock Dorcasoverheard her mistress saying angrily You need not think that anyfear of publicity or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.I conjectured and conjectured rightly that these words wereaddressed not to her husband but to Mr. John Cavendish. At fiveoclock an hour later she uses almost the same words but thestandpoint is different. She admits to Dorcas I dont know what todo scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing. At fouroclock she has been angry but completely mistress of herself. At fiveoclock she is in violent distress and speaks of having had a greatshock.Looking at the matter psychologically I drew one deduction which Iwas convinced was correct. The second scandal she spoke of was notthe same as the firstand it concerned herselfLet us reconstruct. At four oclock Mrs. Inglethorp quarrels with herson and threatens to denounce him to his wifewho by the wayoverheard the greater part of the conversation. At fourthirty Mrs.Inglethorp in consequence of a conversation on the validity of willsmakes a will in favour of her husband which the two gardeners witness.At five oclock Dorcas finds her mistress in a state of considerableagitation with a slip of papera letter Dorcas thinksin her handand it is then that she orders the fire in her room to be lighted.Presumably then between fourthirty and five oclock something hasoccurred to occasion a complete revolution of feeling since she is nowas anxious to destroy the will as she was before to make it. What wasthat somethingAs far as we know she was quite alone during that halfhour. Nobodyentered or left that boudoir. What then occasioned this sudden changeof sentimentOne can only guess but I believe my guess to be correct. Mrs.Inglethorp had no stamps in her desk. We know this because later sheasked Dorcas to bring her some. Now in the opposite corner of the roomstood her husbands desklocked. She was anxious to find some stampsand according to my theory she tried her own keys in the desk. Thatone of them fitted I know. She therefore opened the desk and insearching for the stamps she came across something elsethat slip ofpaper which Dorcas saw in her hand and which assuredly was never meantfor Mrs. Inglethorps eyes. On the other hand Mrs. Cavendish believedthat the slip of paper to which her motherinlaw clung so tenaciouslywas a written proof of her own husbands infidelity. She demanded itfrom Mrs. Inglethorp who assured her quite truly that it had nothingto do with that matter. Mrs. Cavendish did not believe her. She thoughtthat Mrs. Inglethorp was shielding her stepson. Now Mrs. Cavendish is avery resolute woman and behind her mask of reserve she was madlyjealous of her husband. She determined to get hold of that paper at allcosts and in this resolution chance came to her aid. She happened topick up the key of Mrs. Inglethorps despatchcase which had been lostthat morning. She knew that her motherinlaw invariably kept allimportant papers in this particular case.Mrs. Cavendish therefore made her plans as only a woman drivendesperate through jealousy could have done. Some time in the eveningshe unbolted the door leading into Mademoiselle Cynthias room.Possibly she applied oil to the hinges for I found that it openedquite noiselessly when I tried it. She put off her project until theearly hours of the morning as being safer since the servants wereaccustomed to hearing her move about her room at that time. She dressedcompletely in her land kit and made her way quietly throughMademoiselle Cynthias room into that of Mrs. Inglethorp.He paused a moment and Cynthia interruptedBut I should have woken up if anyone had come through my roomNot if you were drugged mademoiselle.DruggedMais ouiYou rememberhe addressed us collectively againthat through all thetumult and noise next door Mademoiselle Cynthia slept. That admitted oftwo possibilities. Either her sleep was feignedwhich I did notbelieveor her unconsciousness was induced by artificial means.With this latter idea in my mind I examined all the coffeecups mostcarefully remembering that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had broughtMademoiselle Cynthia her coffee the night before. I took a sample fromeach cup and had them analysedwith no result. I had counted the cupscarefully in the event of one having been removed. Six persons hadtaken coffee and six cups were duly found. I had to confess myselfmistaken.Then I discovered that I had been guilty of a very grave oversight.Coffee had been brought in for seven persons not six for Dr.Bauerstein had been there that evening. This changed the face of thewhole affair for there was now one cup missing. The servants noticednothing since Annie the housemaid who took in the coffee brought inseven cups not knowing that Mr. Inglethorp never drank it whereasDorcas who cleared them away the following morning found six asusualor strictly speaking she found five the sixth being the onefound broken in Mrs. Inglethorps room.I was confident that the missing cup was that of Mademoiselle Cynthia.I had an additional reason for that belief in the fact that all thecups found contained sugar which Mademoiselle Cynthia never took inher coffee. My attention was attracted by the story of Annie about somesalt on the tray of cocoa which she took every night to Mrs.Inglethorps room. I accordingly secured a sample of that cocoa andsent it to be analysed.But that had already been done by Dr. Bauerstein said Lawrencequickly.Not exactly. The analyst was asked by him to report whether strychninewas or was not present. He did not have it tested as I did for anarcotic.For a narcoticYes. Here is the analysts report. Mrs. Cavendish administered a safebut effectual narcotic to both Mrs. Inglethorp and MademoiselleCynthia. And it is possible that she had a mauvais quart dheure inconsequence Imagine her feelings when her motherinlaw is suddenlytaken ill and dies and immediately after she hears the word PoisonShe has believed that the sleeping draught she administered wasperfectly harmless but there is no doubt that for one terrible momentshe must have feared that Mrs. Inglethorps death lay at her door. Sheis seized with panic and under its influence she hurries downstairsand quickly drops the coffeecup and saucer used by MademoiselleCynthia into a large brass vase where it is discovered later byMonsieur Lawrence. The remains of the cocoa she dare not touch. Toomany eyes are upon her. Guess at her relief when strychnine ismentioned and she discovers that after all the tragedy is not herdoing.We are now able to account for the symptoms of strychnine poisoningbeing so long in making their appearance. A narcotic taken withstrychnine will delay the action of the poison for some hours.Poirot paused. Mary looked up at him the colour slowly rising in herface.All you have said is quite true Monsieur Poirot. It was the mostawful hour of my life. I shall never forget it. But you are wonderful.I understand nowWhat I meant when I told you that you could safely confess to PapaPoirot eh But you would not trust me.I see everything now said Lawrence. The drugged cocoa taken on topof the poisoned coffee amply accounts for the delay.Exactly. But was the coffee poisoned or was it not We come to alittle difficulty here since Mrs. Inglethorp never drank it.What The cry of surprise was universal.No. You will remember my speaking of a stain on the carpet in Mrs.Inglethorps room There were some peculiar points about that stain. Itwas still damp it exhaled a strong odour of coffee and imbedded inthe nap of the carpet I found some little splinters of china. What hadhappened was plain to me for not two minutes before I had placed mylittle case on the table near the window and the table tilting uphad deposited it upon the floor on precisely the identical spot. Inexactly the same way Mrs. Inglethorp had laid down her cup of coffeeon reaching her room the night before and the treacherous table hadplayed her the same trick.What happened next is mere guess work on my part but I should saythat Mrs. Inglethorp picked up the broken cup and placed it on thetable by the bed. Feeling in need of a stimulant of some kind sheheated up her cocoa and drank it off then and there. Now we are facedwith a new problem. We know the cocoa contained no strychnine. Thecoffee was never drunk. Yet the strychnine must have been administeredbetween seven and nine oclock that evening. What third medium wastherea medium so suitable for disguising the taste of strychnine thatit is extraordinary no one has thought of it Poirot looked round theroom and then answered himself impressively. Her medicineDo you mean that the murderer introduced the strychnine into hertonic I cried.There was no need to introduce it. It was already therein themixture. The strychnine that killed Mrs. Inglethorp was the identicalstrychnine prescribed by Dr. Wilkins. To make that clear to you I willread you an extract from a book on dispensing which I found in theDispensary of the Red Cross Hospital at TadminsterThe following prescription has become famous in text books Strychninae Sulph. . . . . . gr. Potass Bromide . . . . . . . vi Aqua ad. . . . . . . . . . . . . viii Fiat MisturaThis solution deposits in a few hours the greater part of thestrychnine salt as an insoluble bromide in transparent crystals. A ladyin England lost her life by taking a similar mixture the precipitatedstrychnine collected at the bottom and in taking the last dose sheswallowed nearly all of itNow there was of course no bromide in Dr. Wilkins prescription butyou will remember that I mentioned an empty box of bromide powders. Oneor two of those powders introduced into the full bottle of medicinewould effectually precipitate the strychnine as the book describesand cause it to be taken in the last dose. You will learn later thatthe person who usually poured out Mrs. Inglethorps medicine was alwaysextremely careful not to shake the bottle but to leave the sediment atthe bottom of it undisturbed.Throughout the case there have been evidences that the tragedy wasintended to take place on Monday evening. On that day Mrs.Inglethorps bell wire was neatly cut and on Monday eveningMademoiselle Cynthia was spending the night with friends so that Mrs.Inglethorp would have been quite alone in the right wing completelyshut off from help of any kind and would have died in allprobability before medical aid could have been summoned. But in herhurry to be in time for the village entertainment Mrs. Inglethorpforgot to take her medicine and the next day she lunched away fromhome so that the lastand fataldose was actually taken twentyfourhours later than had been anticipated by the murderer and it is owingto that delay that the final proofthe last link of the chainis now inmy hands.Amid breathless excitement he held out three thin strips of paper.A letter in the murderers own handwriting mes amis Had it been alittle clearer in its terms it is possible that Mrs. Inglethorpwarned in time would have escaped. As it was she realized her dangerbut not the manner of it.In the deathly silence Poirot pieced together the slips of paper andclearing his throat readDearest Evelyn You will be anxious at hearing nothing. It is all rightonly it will be tonight instead of last night. You understand. Theres a good time coming once the old woman is dead and out of the way. No one can possibly bring home the crime to me. That idea of yours about the bromides was a stroke of genius But we must be very circumspect. A false stepHere my friends the letter breaks off. Doubtless the writer wasinterrupted but there can be no question as to his identity. We allknow this handwriting andA howl that was almost a scream broke the silence.You devil How did you get itA chair was overturned. Poirot skipped nimbly aside. A quick movementon his part and his assailant fell with a crash.Messieurs mesdames said Poirot with a flourish let meintroduce you to the murderer Mr. Alfred InglethorpCHAPTER XIII.POIROT EXPLAINSPoirot you old villain I said Ive half a mind to strangle youWhat do you mean by deceiving me as you have doneWe were sitting in the library. Several hectic days lay behind us. Inthe room below John and Mary were together once more while AlfredInglethorp and Miss Howard were in custody. Now at last I had Poirotto myself and could relieve my still burning curiosity.Poirot did not answer me for a moment but at last he saidI did not deceive you mon ami. At most I permitted you to deceiveyourself.Yes but whyWell it is difficult to explain. You see my friend you have anature so honest and a countenance so transparent thatenfin toconceal your feelings is impossible If I had told you my ideas thevery first time you saw Mr. Alfred Inglethorp that astute gentlemanwould havein your so expressive idiomsmelt a rat And thenbonjour to our chances of catching himI think that I have more diplomacy than you give me credit for.My friend besought Poirot I implore you do not enrage yourselfYour help has been of the most invaluable. It is but the extremelybeautiful nature that you have which made me pause.Well I grumbled a little mollified. I still think you might havegiven me a hint.But I did my friend. Several hints. You would not take them. Thinknow did I ever say to you that I believed John Cavendish guilty Did Inot on the contrary tell you that he would almost certainly beacquittedYes butAnd did I not immediately afterwards speak of the difficulty ofbringing the murderer to justice Was it not plain to you that I wasspeaking of two entirely different personsNo I said it was not plain to meThen again continued Poirot at the beginning did I not repeat toyou several times that I didnt want Mr. Inglethorp arrested nowThat should have conveyed something to you.Do you mean to say you suspected him as long ago as thatYes. To begin with whoever else might benefit by Mrs. Inglethorpsdeath her husband would benefit the most. There was no getting awayfrom that. When I went up to Styles with you that first day I had noidea as to how the crime had been committed but from what I knew ofMr. Inglethorp I fancied that it would be very hard to find anything toconnect him with it. When I arrived at the château I realized at oncethat it was Mrs. Inglethorp who had burnt the will and there by theway you cannot complain my friend for I tried my best to force onyou the significance of that bedroom fire in midsummer.Yes yes I said impatiently. Go on.Well my friend as I say my views as to Mr. Inglethorps guilt werevery much shaken. There was in fact so much evidence against him thatI was inclined to believe that he had not done it.When did you change your mindWhen I found that the more efforts I made to clear him the moreefforts he made to get himself arrested. Then when I discovered thatInglethorp had nothing to do with Mrs. Raikes and that in fact it wasJohn Cavendish who was interested in that quarter I was quite sure.But whySimply this. If it had been Inglethorp who was carrying on an intriguewith Mrs. Raikes his silence was perfectly comprehensible. But when Idiscovered that it was known all over the village that it was John whowas attracted by the farmers pretty wife his silence bore quite adifferent interpretation. It was nonsense to pretend that he was afraidof the scandal as no possible scandal could attach to him. Thisattitude of his gave me furiously to think and I was slowly forced tothe conclusion that Alfred Inglethorp wanted to be arrested. Eh bienfrom that moment I was equally determined that he should not bearrested.Wait a minute. I dont see why he wished to be arrestedBecause mon ami it is the law of your country that a man onceacquitted can never be tried again for the same offence. Aha but itwas cleverhis idea Assuredly he is a man of method. See here heknew that in his position he was bound to be suspected so he conceivedthe exceedingly clever idea of preparing a lot of manufactured evidenceagainst himself. He wished to be arrested. He would then produce hisirreproachable alibiand hey presto he was safe for lifeBut I still dont see how he managed to prove his alibi and yet go tothe chemists shopPoirot stared at me in surprise.Is it possible My poor friend You have not yet realized that it wasMiss Howard who went to the chemists shopMiss HowardBut certainly. Who else It was most easy for her. She is of a goodheight her voice is deep and manly moreover remember she andInglethorp are cousins and there is a distinct resemblance betweenthem especially in their gait and bearing. It was simplicity itself.They are a clever pairI am still a little fogged as to how exactly the bromide business wasdone I remarked.Bon I will reconstruct for you as far as possible. I am inclined tothink that Miss Howard was the master mind in that affair. You rememberher once mentioning that her father was a doctor Possibly shedispensed his medicines for him or she may have taken the idea fromone of the many books lying about when Mademoiselle Cynthia wasstudying for her exam. Anyway she was familiar with the fact that theaddition of a bromide to a mixture containing strychnine would causethe precipitation of the latter. Probably the idea came to her quitesuddenly. Mrs. Inglethorp had a box of bromide powders which sheoccasionally took at night. What could be easier than quietly todissolve one or more of those powders in Mrs. Inglethorps large sizedbottle of medicine when it came from Coots The risk is practicallynil. The tragedy will not take place until nearly a fortnight later. Ifanyone has seen either of them touching the medicine they will haveforgotten it by that time. Miss Howard will have engineered herquarrel and departed from the house. The lapse of time and herabsence will defeat all suspicion. Yes it was a clever idea If theyhad left it alone it is possible the crime might never have beenbrought home to them. But they were not satisfied. They tried to be toocleverand that was their undoing.Poirot puffed at his tiny cigarette his eyes fixed on the ceiling.They arranged a plan to throw suspicion on John Cavendish by buyingstrychnine at the village chemists and signing the register in hishandwriting.On Monday Mrs. Inglethorp will take the last dose of her medicine. OnMonday therefore at six oclock Alfred Inglethorp arranges to beseen by a number of people at a spot far removed from the village. MissHoward has previously made up a cock and bull story about him and Mrs.Raikes to account for his holding his tongue afterwards. At sixoclock Miss Howard disguised as Alfred Inglethorp enters thechemists shop with her story about a dog obtains the strychnine andwrites the name of Alfred Inglethorp in Johns handwriting which shehad previously studied carefully.But as it will never do if John too can prove an alibi she writeshim an anonymous notestill copying his handwritingwhich takes him toa remote spot where it is exceedingly unlikely that anyone will seehim.So far all goes well. Miss Howard goes back to Middlingham. AlfredInglethorp returns to Styles. There is nothing that can compromise himin any way since it is Miss Howard who has the strychnine whichafter all is only wanted as a blind to throw suspicion on JohnCavendish.But now a hitch occurs. Mrs. Inglethorp does not take her medicinethat night. The broken bell Cynthias absencearranged by Inglethorpthrough his wifeall these are wasted. And thenhe makes his slip.Mrs. Inglethorp is out and he sits down to write to his accomplicewho he fears may be in a panic at the nonsuccess of their plan. Itis probable that Mrs. Inglethorp returned earlier than he expected.Caught in the act and somewhat flurried he hastily shuts and locks hisdesk. He fears that if he remains in the room he may have to open itagain and that Mrs. Inglethorp might catch sight of the letter beforehe could snatch it up. So he goes out and walks in the woods littledreaming that Mrs. Inglethorp will open his desk and discover theincriminating document.But this as we know is what happened. Mrs. Inglethorp reads it andbecomes aware of the perfidy of her husband and Evelyn Howard thoughunfortunately the sentence about the bromides conveys no warning toher mind. She knows that she is in dangerbut is ignorant of where thedanger lies. She decides to say nothing to her husband but sits downand writes to her solicitor asking him to come on the morrow and shealso determines to destroy immediately the will which she has justmade. She keeps the fatal letter.It was to discover that letter then that her husband forced the lockof the despatchcaseYes and from the enormous risk he ran we can see how fully herealized its importance. That letter excepted there was absolutelynothing to connect him with the crime.Theres only one thing I cant make out why didnt he destroy it atonce when he got hold of itBecause he did not dare take the biggest risk of allthat of keepingit on his own person.I dont understand.Look at it from his point of view. I have discovered that there wereonly five short minutes in which he could have taken itthe fiveminutes immediately before our own arrival on the scene for beforethat time Annie was brushing the stairs and would have seen anyone whopassed going to the right wing. Figure to yourself the scene He entersthe room unlocking the door by means of one of the other doorkeystheywere all much alike. He hurries to the despatchcaseit is locked andthe keys are nowhere to be seen. That is a terrible blow to him for itmeans that his presence in the room cannot be concealed as he hadhoped. But he sees clearly that everything must be risked for the sakeof that damning piece of evidence. Quickly he forces the lock with apenknife and turns over the papers until he finds what he is lookingfor.But now a fresh dilemma arises he dare not keep that piece of paperon him. He may be seen leaving the roomhe may be searched. If thepaper is found on him it is certain doom. Probably at this minutetoo he hears the sounds below of Mr. Wells and John leaving theboudoir. He must act quickly. Where can he hide this terrible slip ofpaper The contents of the wastepaperbasket are kept and in any caseare sure to be examined. There are no means of destroying it and hedare not keep it. He looks round and he seeswhat do you think monamiI shook my head.In a moment he has torn the letter into long thin strips and rollingthem up into spills he thrusts them hurriedly in amongst the otherspills in the vase on the mantlepiece.I uttered an exclamation.No one would think of looking there Poirot continued. And he willbe able at his leisure to come back and destroy this solitary pieceof evidence against him.Then all the time it was in the spill vase in Mrs. Inglethorpsbedroom under our very noses I cried.Poirot nodded.Yes my friend. That is where I discovered my last link and I owethat very fortunate discovery to you.To meYes. Do you remember telling me that my hand shook as I wasstraightening the ornaments on the mantelpieceYes but I dont seeNo but I saw. Do you know my friend I remembered that earlier inthe morning when we had been there together I had straightened allthe objects on the mantelpiece. And if they were already straightenedthere would be no need to straighten them again unless in themeantime someone else had touched them.Dear me I murmured so that is the explanation of yourextraordinary behaviour. You rushed down to Styles and found it stillthereYes and it was a race for time.But I still cant understand why Inglethorp was such a fool as toleave it there when he had plenty of opportunity to destroy it.Ah but he had no opportunity. I saw to that.YouYes. Do you remember reproving me for taking the household into myconfidence on the subjectYes.Well my friend I saw there was just one chance. I was not sure thenif Inglethorp was the criminal or not but if he was I reasoned that hewould not have the paper on him but would have hidden it somewhereand by enlisting the sympathy of the household I could effectuallyprevent his destroying it. He was already under suspicion and bymaking the matter public I secured the services of about ten amateurdetectives who would be watching him unceasingly and being himselfaware of their watchfulness he would not dare seek further to destroythe document. He was therefore forced to depart from the house leavingit in the spill vase.But surely Miss Howard had ample opportunities of aiding him.Yes but Miss Howard did not know of the papers existence. Inaccordance with their prearranged plan she never spoke to AlfredInglethorp. They were supposed to be deadly enemies and until JohnCavendish was safely convicted they neither of them dared risk ameeting. Of course I had a watch kept on Mr. Inglethorp hoping thatsooner or later he would lead me to the hidingplace. But he was tooclever to take any chances. The paper was safe where it was since noone had thought of looking there in the first week it was not likelythey would do so afterwards. But for your lucky remark we might neverhave been able to bring him to justice.I understand that now but when did you first begin to suspect MissHowardWhen I discovered that she had told a lie at the inquest about theletter she had received from Mrs. Inglethorp.Why what was there to lie aboutYou saw that letter Do you recall its general appearanceYesmore or less.You will recollect then that Mrs. Inglethorp wrote a verydistinctive hand and left large clear spaces between her words. But ifyou look at the date at the top of the letter you will notice thatJuly th is quite different in this respect. Do you see what ImeanNo I confessed I dont.You do not see that that letter was not written on the th but onthe ththe day after Miss Howards departure The was written inbefore the to turn it into the th.But whyThat is exactly what I asked myself. Why does Miss Howard suppress theletter written on the th and produce this faked one instead Becauseshe did not wish to show the letter of the th. Why again And atonce a suspicion dawned in my mind. You will remember my saying that itwas wise to beware of people who were not telling you the truth.And yet I cried indignantly after that you gave me two reasonswhy Miss Howard could not have committed the crimeAnd very good reasons too replied Poirot. For a long time they werea stumblingblock to me until I remembered a very significant factthat she and Alfred Inglethorp were cousins. She could not havecommitted the crime singlehanded but the reasons against that did notdebar her from being an accomplice. And then there was that ratherovervehement hatred of hers It concealed a very opposite emotion.There was undoubtedly a tie of passion between them long before hecame to Styles. They had already arranged their infamous plotthat heshould marry this rich but rather foolish old lady induce her to makea will leaving her money to him and then gain their ends by a verycleverly conceived crime. If all had gone as they planned they wouldprobably have left England and lived together on their poor victimsmoney.They are a very astute and unscrupulous pair. While suspicion was tobe directed against him she would be making quiet preparations for avery different dénouement. She arrives from Middlingham with all thecompromising items in her possession. No suspicion attaches to her. Nonotice is paid to her coming and going in the house. She hides thestrychnine and glasses in Johns room. She puts the beard in the attic.She will see to it that sooner or later they are duly discovered.I dont quite see why they tried to fix the blame on John Iremarked. It would have been much easier for them to bring the crimehome to Lawrence.Yes but that was mere chance. All the evidence against him arose outof pure accident. It must in fact have been distinctly annoying tothe pair of schemers.His manner was unfortunate I observed thoughtfully.Yes. You realize of course what was at the back of thatNo.You did not understand that he believed Mademoiselle Cynthia guilty ofthe crimeNo I exclaimed astonished. ImpossibleNot at all. I myself nearly had the same idea. It was in my mind whenI asked Mr. Wells that first question about the will. Then there werethe bromide powders which she had made up and her clever maleimpersonations as Dorcas recounted them to us. There was really moreevidence against her than anyone else.You are joking PoirotNo. Shall I tell you what made Monsieur Lawrence turn so pale when hefirst entered his mothers room on the fatal night It was becausewhilst his mother lay there obviously poisoned he saw over yourshoulder that the door into Mademoiselle Cynthias room was unbolted.But he declared that he saw it bolted I cried.Exactly said Poirot dryly. And that was just what confirmed mysuspicion that it was not. He was shielding Mademoiselle Cynthia.But why should he shield herBecause he is in love with her.I laughed.There Poirot you are quite wrong I happen to know for a fact thatfar from being in love with her he positively dislikes her.Who told you that mon amiCynthia herself.La pauvre petite And she was concernedShe said that she did not mind at all.Then she certainly did mind very much remarked Poirot. They arelike thatles femmesWhat you say about Lawrence is a great surprise to me I said.But why It was most obvious. Did not Monsieur Lawrence make the sourface every time Mademoiselle Cynthia spoke and laughed with hisbrother He had taken it into his long head that Mademoiselle Cynthiawas in love with Monsieur John. When he entered his mothers room andsaw her obviously poisoned he jumped to the conclusion thatMademoiselle Cynthia knew something about the matter. He was nearlydriven desperate. First he crushed the coffeecup to powder under hisfeet remembering that she had gone up with his mother the nightbefore and he determined that there should be no chance of testing itscontents. Thenceforward he strenuously and quite uselessly upheldthe theory of Death from natural causes.And what about the extra coffeecupI was fairly certain that it was Mrs. Cavendish who had hidden it butI had to make sure. Monsieur Lawrence did not know at all what I meantbut on reflection he came to the conclusion that if he could find anextra coffeecup anywhere his lady love would be cleared of suspicion.And he was perfectly right.One thing more. What did Mrs. Inglethorp mean by her dying wordsThey were of course an accusation against her husband.Dear me Poirot I said with a sigh I think you have explainedeverything. I am glad it has all ended so happily. Even John and hiswife are reconciled.Thanks to me.How do you meanthanks to youMy dear friend do you not realize that it was simply and solely thetrial which has brought them together again That John Cavendish stillloved his wife I was convinced. Also that she was equally in lovewith him. But they had drifted very far apart. It all arose from amisunderstanding. She married him without love. He knew it. He is asensitive man in his way he would not force himself upon her if shedid not want him. And as he withdrew her love awoke. But they areboth unusually proud and their pride held them inexorably apart. Hedrifted into an entanglement with Mrs. Raikes and she deliberatelycultivated the friendship of Dr. Bauerstein. Do you remember the day ofJohn Cavendishs arrest when you found me deliberating over a bigdecisionYes I quite understood your distress.Pardon me mon ami but you did not understand it in the least. Iwas trying to decide whether or not I would clear John Cavendish atonce. I could have cleared himthough it might have meant a failure toconvict the real criminals. They were entirely in the dark as to myreal attitude up to the very last momentwhich partly accounts for mysuccess.Do you mean that you could have saved John Cavendish from beingbrought to trialYes my friend. But I eventually decided in favour of a womanshappiness. Nothing but the great danger through which they have passedcould have brought these two proud souls together again.I looked at Poirot in silent amazement. The colossal cheek of thelittle man Who on earth but Poirot would have thought of a trial formurder as a restorer of conjugal happinessI perceive your thoughts mon ami said Poirot smiling at me. Noone but Hercule Poirot would have attempted such a thing And you arewrong in condemning it. The happiness of one man and one woman is thegreatest thing in all the world.His words took me back to earlier events. I remembered Mary as she laywhite and exhausted on the sofa listening listening. There had comethe sound of the bell below. She had started up. Poirot had opened thedoor and meeting her agonized eyes had nodded gently. Yes madamehe said. I have brought him back to you. He had stood aside and as Iwent out I had seen the look in Marys eyes as John Cavendish hadcaught his wife in his arms.Perhaps you are right Poirot I said gently. Yes it is thegreatest thing in the world.Suddenly there was a tap at the door and Cynthia peeped in.II onlyCome in I said springing up.She came in but did not sit down.Ionly wanted to tell you somethingYesCynthia fidgeted with a little tassel for some moments then suddenlyexclaiming You dears kissed first me and then Poirot and rushedout of the room again.What on earth does this mean I asked surprised.It was very nice to be kissed by Cynthia but the publicity of thesalute rather impaired the pleasure.It means that she has discovered Monsieur Lawrence does not dislikeher as much as she thought replied Poirot philosophically.ButHere he is.Lawrence at that moment passed the door.Eh Monsieur Lawrence called Poirot. We must congratulate you isit not soLawrence blushed and then smiled awkwardly. A man in love is a sorryspectacle. Now Cynthia had looked charming.I sighed.What is it mon amiNothing I said sadly. They are two delightful womenAnd neither of them is for you finished Poirot. Never mind. Consoleyourself my friend. We may hunt together again who knows And then