CHAPTER MY UNCLE MAKES A GREAT DISCOVERYLooking back to all that has occurred to me since that eventful day Iam scarcely able to believe in the reality of my adventures. They weretruly so wonderful that even now I am bewildered when I think of them.My uncle was a German having married my mothers sister anEnglishwoman. Being very much attached to his fatherless nephew heinvited me to study under him in his home in the fatherland. This homewas in a large town and my uncle a professor of philosophy chemistrygeology mineralogy and many other ologies.One day after passing some hours in the laboratorymy uncle beingabsent at the timeI suddenly felt the necessity of renovating thetissuesii.e.i I was hungry and was about to rouse up our old Frenchcook when my uncle Professor Von Hardwigg suddenly opened the streetdoor and came rushing upstairs.Now Professor Hardwigg my worthy uncle is by no means a bad sort ofman he is however choleric and original. To bear with him means toobey and scarcely had his heavy feet resounded within our jointdomicile than he shouted for me to attend upon him.HarryHarryHarryI hastened to obey but before I could reach his room jumping threesteps at a time he was stamping his right foot upon the landing.Harry he cried in a frantic tone are you coming upNow to tell the truth at that moment I was far more interested in thequestion as to what was to constitute our dinner than in any problem ofscience to me soup was more interesting than soda an omelette moretempting than arithmetic and an artichoke of ten times more value thanany amount of asbestos.But my uncle was not a man to be kept waiting so adjourning thereforeall minor questions I presented myself before him.He was a very learned man. Now most persons in this category supplythemselves with information as peddlers do with goods for the benefitof others and lay up stores in order to diffuse them abroad for thebenefit of society in general. Not so my excellent uncle ProfessorHardwigg he studied he consumed the midnight oil he pored over heavytomes and digested huge quartos and folios in order to keep theknowledge acquired to himself.There was a reason and it may be regarded as a good one why my uncleobjected to display his learning more than was absolutely necessary hestammered and when intent upon explaining the phenomena of the heavenswas apt to find himself at fault and allude in such a vague way to sunmoon and stars that few were able to comprehend his meaning. To tellthe honest truth when the right word would not come it was generallyreplaced by a very powerful adjective.In connection with the sciences there are many almost unpronounceablenamesnames very much resembling those of Welsh villages and my unclebeing very fond of using them his habit of stammering was not therebyimproved. In fact there were periods in his discourse when he wouldfinally give up and swallow his discomfiturein a glass of water.As I said my uncle Professor Hardwigg was a very learned man and Inow add a most kind relative. I was bound to him by the double ties ofaffection and interest. I took deep interest in all his doings andhoped some day to be almost as learned myself. It was a rare thing forme to be absent from his lectures. Like him I preferred mineralogy toall the other sciences. My anxiety was to gain real iknowledge of theearthi. Geology and mineralogy were to us the sole objects of life andin connection with these studies many a fair specimen of stone chalkor metal did we break with our hammers.Steel rods loadstones glass pipes and bottles of various acids wereoftener before us than our meals. My uncle Hardwigg was once known toclassify six hundred different geological specimens by their weighthardness fusibility sound taste and smell.He corresponded with all the great learned and scientific men of theage. I was therefore in constant communication with at all events theletters of Sir Humphry Davy Captain Franklin and other great men.But before I state the subject on which my uncle wished to confer withme I must say a word about his personal appearance. Alas my readerswill see a very different portrait of him at a future time after he hasgone through the fearful adventures yet to be related.My uncle was fifty years old tall thin and wiry. Large spectacleshid to a certain extent his vast round and goggle eyes while hisnose was irreverently compared to a thin file. So much indeed did itresemble that useful article that a compass was said in his presence tohave made considerable N Nasal deviation.The truth being told however the only article really attracted to myuncles nose was tobacco.Another peculiarity of his was that he always stepped a yard at a timeclenched his fists as if he were going to hit you and was when in oneof his peculiar humors very far from a pleasant companion.It is further necessary to observe that he lived in a very nice housein that very nice street the Konigstrasse at Hamburg. Though lying inthe centre of a town it was perfectly rural in its aspecthalf woodhalf bricks with oldfashioned gablesone of the few old houses sparedby the great fire of .When I say a nice house I mean a handsome houseold tottering andnot exactly comfortable to English notions a house a little off theperpendicular and inclined to fall into the neighboring canal exactlythe house for a wandering artist to depict all the more that you couldscarcely see it for ivy and a magnificent old tree which grew over thedoor.My uncle was rich his house was his own property while he had aconsiderable private income. To my notion the best part of hispossessions was his goddaughter Gretchen. And the old cook the younglady the Professor and I were the sole inhabitants.I loved mineralogy I loved geology. To me there was nothing likepebblesand if my uncle had been in a little less of a fury we shouldhave been the happiest of families. To prove the excellent Hardwiggsimpatience I solemnly declare that when the flowers in the drawingroompots began to grow he rose every morning at four oclock to make themgrow quicker by pulling the leavesHaving described my uncle I will now give an account of our interview.He received me in his study a perfect museum containing every naturalcuriosity that can well be imaginedminerals however predominating.Every one was familiar to me having been catalogued by my own hand. Myuncle apparently oblivious of the fact that he had summoned me to hispresence was absorbed in a book. He was particularly fond of earlyeditions tall copies and unique works.Wonderful he cried tapping his forehead. WonderfulwonderfulIt was one of those yellowleaved volumes now rarely found on stallsand to me it appeared to possess but little value. My uncle howeverwas in raptures.He admired its binding the clearness of its characters the ease withwhich it opened in his hand and repeated aloud half a dozen timesthat it was very very old.To my fancy he was making a great fuss about nothing but it was not myprovince to say so. On the contrary I professed considerable interestin the subject and asked him what it was about.It is the HeimsKringla of Snorre Tarleson he said the celebratedIcelandic author of the twelfth centuryit is a true and correctaccount of the Norwegian princes who reigned in Iceland.My next question related to the language in which it was written. Ihoped at all events it was translated into German. My uncle wasindignant at the very thought and declared he wouldnt give a penny fora translation. His delight was to have found the original work in theIcelandic tongue which he declared to be one of the most magnificentand yet simple idioms in the worldwhile at the same time itsgrammatical combinations were the most varied known to students.About as easy as German was my insidious remark.My uncle shrugged his shoulders.The letters at all events I said are rather difficult ofcomprehension.It is a Runic manuscript the language of the original population ofIceland invented by Odin himself cried my uncle angry at myignorance.I was about to venture upon some misplaced joke on the subject when asmall scrap of parchment fell out of the leaves. Like a hungry mansnatching at a morsel of bread the Professor seized it. It was aboutfive inches by three and was scrawled over in the most extraordinaryfashion.The lines shown here are an exact facsimile of what was written on thevenerable piece of parchmentand have wonderful importance as theyinduced my uncle to undertake the most wonderful series of adventureswhich ever fell to the lot of human beings.My uncle looked keenly at the document for some moments and thendeclared that it was Runic. The letters were similar to those in thebook but then what did they mean This was exactly what I wanted toknow.Now as I had a strong conviction that the Runic alphabet and dialectwere simply an invention to mystify poor human nature I was delightedto find that my uncle knew as much about the matter as I didwhich wasnothing. At all events the tremulous motion of his fingers made me thinkso.And yet he muttered to himself it is old Icelandic I am sure ofit.And my uncle ought to have known for he was a perfect polyglotdictionary in himself. He did not pretend like a certain learnedpundit to speak the two thousand languages and four thousand idiomsmade use of in different parts of the globe but he did know all themore important ones.It is a matter of great doubt to me now to what violent measures myuncles impetuosity might have led him had not the clock struck twoand our old French cook called out to let us know that dinner was on thetable.Bother the dinner cried my uncle.But as I was hungry I sallied forth to the dining room where I took upmy usual quarters. Out of politeness I waited three minutes but no signof my uncle the Professor. I was surprised. He was not usually so blindto the pleasure of a good dinner. It was the acme of Germanluxuryparsley soup a ham omelette with sorrel trimmings an oyster ofveal stewed with prunes delicious fruit and sparkling Moselle. For thesake of poring over this musty old piece of parchment my uncle forboreto share our meal. To satisfy my conscience I ate for both.The old cook and housekeeper was nearly out of her mind. After taking somuch trouble to find her master not appear at dinner was to her a saddisappointmentwhich as she occasionally watched the havoc I wasmaking on the viands became also alarm. If my uncle were to come totable after allSuddenly just as I had consumed the last apple and drunk the last glassof wine a terrible voice was heard at no great distance. It was myuncle roaring for me to come to him. I made very nearly one leap ofitso loud so fierce was his tone.CHAPTER THE MYSTERIOUS PARCHMENTIllustration Runic GlyphsI Declare cried my uncle striking the table fiercely with his fistI declare to you it is Runicand contains some wonderful secret whichI must get at at any price.I was about to reply when he stopped me.Sit down he said quite fiercely and write to my dictation.I obeyed.I will substitute he said a letter of our alphabet for that of theRunic we will then see what that will produce. Now begin and make nomistakes.The dictation commenced with the following incomprehensible result mm.rnlls esruel seecJde sgtssmf unteief niedrke ktsamn atrateS Saodrrn emtnaeI nuaect rrilSa Atvaar .nscrc ieaabs ccdrmi eeutul frantu dtiac oseibo KediiYScarcely giving me time to finish my uncle snatched the document frommy hands and examined it with the most rapt and deep attention.I should like to know what it means he said after a long period.I certainly could not tell him nor did he expect me tohisconversation being uniformly answered by himself.I declare it puts me in mind of a cryptograph he cried unlessindeed the letters have been written without any real meaning and yetwhy take so much trouble Who knows but I may be on the verge of somegreat discoveryMy candid opinion was that it was all rubbish But this opinion I keptcarefully to myself as my uncles choler was not pleasant to bear. Allthis time he was comparing the book with the parchment.The manuscript volume and the smaller document are written in differenthands he said the cryptograph is of much later date than the bookthere is an undoubted proof of the correctness of my surmise. Anirrefragable proof I took it to be. The first letter is a double Mwhich was only added to the Icelandic language in the twelfthcenturythis makes the parchment two hundred years posterior to thevolume.The circumstances appeared very probable and very logical but it wasall surmise to me.To me it appears probable that this sentence was written by some ownerof the book. Now who was the owner is the next important question.Perhaps by great good luck it may be written somewhere in the volume.With these words Professor Hardwigg took off his spectacles and takinga powerful magnifying glass examined the book carefully.On the fly leaf was what appeared to be a blot of ink but onexamination proved to be a line of writing almost effaced by time. Thiswas what he sought and after some considerable time he made out theselettersIllustration Runic GlyphsArne Saknussemm he cried in a joyous and triumphant tone that isnot only an Icelandic name but of a learned professor of the sixteenthcentury a celebrated alchemist.I bowed as a sign of respect.These alchemists he continued Avicenna Bacon Lully Paracelsuswere the true the only learned men of the day. They made surprisingdiscoveries. May not this Saknussemm nephew mine have hidden on thisbit of parchment some astounding invention I believe the cryptograph tohave a profound meaningwhich I must make out.My uncle walked about the room in a state of excitement almostimpossible to describe.It may be so sir I timidly observed but why conceal it fromposterity if it be a useful a worthy discoveryWhyhow should I know Did not Galileo make a secret of hisdiscoveries in connection with Saturn But we shall see. Until Idiscover the meaning of this sentence I will neither eat nor sleep.My dear uncle I began.Nor you neither he added.It was lucky I had taken double allowance that day.In the first place he continued there must be a clue to themeaning. If we could find that the rest would be easy enough.I began seriously to reflect. The prospect of going without food andsleep was not a promising one so I determined to do my best to solvethe mystery. My uncle meanwhile went on with his soliloquy.The way to discover it is easy enough. In this document there are onehundred and thirtytwo letters giving seventynine consonants tofiftythree vowels. This is about the proportion found in most southernlanguages the idioms of the north being much more rich in consonants.We may confidently predict therefore that we have to deal with asouthern dialect.Nothing could be more logical.Now said Professor Hardwigg to trace the particular language.As Shakespeare says that is the question was my rather satiricalreply.This man Saknussemm he continued was a very learned man now as hedid not write in the language of his birthplace he probably like mostlearned men of the sixteenth century wrote in Latin. If however Iprove wrong in this guess we must try Spanish French Italian Greekand even Hebrew. My own opinion though is decidedly in favor ofLatin.This proposition startled me. Latin was my favorite study and it seemedsacrilege to believe this gibberish to belong to the country of Virgil.Barbarous Latin in all probability continued my uncle but stillLatin.Very probably I replied not to contradict him.Let us see into the matter continued my uncle here you see we havea series of one hundred and thirtytwo letters apparently thrownpellmell upon paper without method or organization. There are wordswhich are composed wholly of consonants such as imm.rnllsi otherswhich are nearly all vowels the fifth for instance which is unteiefand one of the last oseibo. This appears an extraordinary combination.Probably we shall find that the phrase is arranged according to somemathematical plan. No doubt a certain sentence has been written out andthen jumbled upsome plan to which some figure is the clue. Now Harryto show your English witwhat is that figureI could give him no hint. My thoughts were indeed far away. While he wasspeaking I had caught sight of the portrait of my cousin Gretchen andwas wondering when she would return.We were affianced and loved one another very sincerely. But my unclewho never thought even of such sublunary matters knew nothing of this.Without noticing my abstraction the Professor began reading thepuzzling cryptograph all sorts of ways according to some theory of hisown. Presently rousing my wandering attention he dictated one preciousattempt to me.I mildly handed it over to him. It read as follows immessunkaSenrA.icefdoK.segnittamurtn ecertserretterotaivsaduaednecsedsadne lacartniiilrJsiratracSarbmutabiledmek meretarcsilucoYsleffenSnI.iI could scarcely keep from laughing while my uncle on the contrarygot in a towering passion struck the table with his fist darted out ofthe room out of the house and then taking to his heels was presentlylost to sight.CHAPTER AN ASTOUNDING DISCOVERYWhat is the matter cried the cook entering the room when willmaster have his dinnerNever.And his supperI dont know. He says he will eat no more neither shall I. My unclehas determined to fast and make me fast until he makes out thisabominable inscription I replied.You will be starved to death she said.I was very much of the same opinion but not liking to say so sent heraway and began some of my usual work of classification. But try as Imight nothing could keep me from thinking alternately of the stupidmanuscript and of the pretty Gretchen.Several times I thought of going out but my uncle would have been angryat my absence. At the end of an hour my allotted task was done. How topass the time I began by lighting my pipe. Like all other students Idelighted in tobacco and seating myself in the great armchair I beganto think.Where was my uncle I could easily imagine him tearing along somesolitary road gesticulating talking to himself cutting the air withhis cane and still thinking of the absurd bit of hieroglyphics. Wouldhe hit upon some clue Would he come home in better humor While thesethoughts were passing through my brain I mechanically took up theexecrable puzzle and tried every imaginable way of grouping the letters.I put them together by twos by threes fours and fivesin vain.Nothing intelligible came out except that the fourteenth fifteenthand sixteenth made iicei in English the eightyfourth eightyfifthand eightysixth the word isiri then at last I seemed to find theLatin words irota mutabile ira nec atrai.Ha there seems to be some truth in my uncles notion thought I.Then again I seemed to find the word ilucoi which means sacred wood.Then in the third line I appeared to make out ilabiledi a perfectHebrew word and at the last the syllables mere are mer which wereFrench.It was enough to drive one mad. Four different idioms in this absurdphrase. What connection could there be between ice sir anger cruelsacred wood changing mother are and sea The first and the lastmight in a sentence connected with Iceland mean sea of ice. But whatof the rest of this monstrous cryptographI was in fact fighting against an insurmountable difficulty my brainwas almost on fire my eyes were strained with staring at the parchmentthe whole absurd collection of letters appeared to dance before myvision in a number of black little groups. My mind was possessed withtemporary hallucinationI was stifling. I wanted air. Mechanically Ifanned myself with the document of which now I saw the back and thenthe front.Imagine my surprise when glancing at the back of the wearisome puzzlethe ink having gone through I clearly made out Latin words and amongothers craterem and terrestre.I had discovered the secretIt came upon me like a flash of lightning. I had got the clue. All youhad to do to understand the document was to read it backwards. All theingenious ideas of the Professor were realized he had dictated itrightly to me by a mere accident I had discovered what he so muchdesired.My delight my emotion may be imagined my eyes were dazzled and Itrembled so that at first I could make nothing of it. One look howeverwould tell me all I wished to know.Let me read I said to myself after drawing a long breath.I spread it before me on the table I passed my finger over each letterI spelled it through in my excitement I read it out.What horror and stupefaction took possession of my soul. I was like aman who had received a knockdown blow. Was it possible that I reallyread the terrible secret and it had really been accomplished A man haddared to dowhatNo living being should ever know.Never cried I jumping up. Never shall my uncle be made aware of thedread secret. He would be quite capable of undertaking the terriblejourney. Nothing would check him nothing stop him. Worse he wouldcompel me to accompany him and we should be lost forever. But no suchfolly and madness cannot be allowed.I was almost beside myself with rage and fury.My worthy uncle is already nearly mad I cried aloud. This wouldfinish him. By some accident he may make the discovery in which casewe are both lost. Perish the fearful secretlet the flames forever buryit in oblivion.I snatched up book and parchment and was about to cast them into thefire when the door opened and my uncle entered.I had scarcely time to put down the wretched documents before my unclewas by my side. He was profoundly absorbed. His thoughts were evidentlybent on the terrible parchment. Some new combination had probably struckhim while taking his walk.He seated himself in his armchair and with a pen began to make analgebraical calculation. I watched him with anxious eyes. My fleshcrawled as it became probable that he would discover the secret.His combinations I knew now were useless I having discovered the oneonly clue. For three mortal hours he continued without speaking a wordwithout raising his head scratching rewriting calculating over andover again. I knew that in time he must hit upon the right phrase. Theletters of every alphabet have only a certain number of combinations.But then years might elapse before he would arrive at the correctsolution.Still time went on night came the sounds in the streets ceasedandstill my uncle went on not even answering our worthy cook when shecalled us to supper.I did not dare to leave him so waved her away and at last fell asleepon the sofa.When I awoke my uncle was still at work. His red eyes his pallidcountenance his matted hair his feverish hands his hectically flushedcheeks showed how terrible had been his struggle with the impossibleand what fearful fatigue he had undergone during that long sleeplessnight. It made me quite ill to look at him. Though he was rather severewith me I loved him and my heart ached at his sufferings. He was soovercome by one idea that he could not even get in a passion All hisenergies were focused on one point. And I knew that by speaking onelittle word all this suffering would cease. I could not speak it.My heart was nevertheless inclining towards him. Why then did Iremain silent In the interest of my uncle himself.Nothing shall make me speak I muttered. He will want to follow inthe footsteps of the other I know him well. His imagination is aperfect volcano and to make discoveries in the interests of geology hewould sacrifice his life. I will therefore be silent and strictly keepthe secret I have discovered. To reveal it would be suicidal. He wouldnot only rush himself to destruction but drag me with him.I crossed my arms looked another way and smokedresolved never tospeak.When our cook wanted to go out to market or on any other errand shefound the front door locked and the key taken away. Was this donepurposely or not Surely Professor Hardwigg did not intend the old womanand myself to become martyrs to his obstinate will. Were we to bestarved to death A frightful recollection came to my mind. Once we hadfed on bits and scraps for a week while he sorted some curiosities. Itgave me the cramp even to think of itI wanted my breakfast and I saw no way of getting it. Still myresolution held good. I would starve rather than yield. But the cookbegan to take me seriously to task. What was to be done She could notgo out and I dared not.My uncle continued counting and writing his imagination seemed to havetranslated him to the skies. He neither thought of eating nor drinking.In this way twelve oclock came round. I was hungry and there wasnothing in the house. The cook had eaten the last bit of bread. Thiscould not go on. It did however until two when my sensations wereterrible. After all I began to think the document very absurd. Perhapsit might only be a gigantic hoax. Besides some means would surely befound to keep my uncle back from attempting any such absurd expedition.On the other hand if he did attempt anything so quixotic I should notbe compelled to accompany him. Another line of reasoning partiallydecided me. Very likely he would make the discovery himself when Ishould have suffered starvation for nothing. Under the influence ofhunger this reasoning appeared admirable. I determined to tell all.The question now arose as to how it was to be done. I was still dwellingon the thought when he rose and put on his hat.What go out and lock us in NeverUncle I began.He did not appear even to hear me.Professor Hardwigg I cried.What he retorted did you speakHow about the keyWhat keythe key of the doorNoof these horrible hieroglyphicsHe looked at me from under his spectacles and started at the oddexpression of my face. Rushing forward he clutched me by the arm andkeenly examined my countenance. His very look was an interrogation.I simply nodded.With an incredulous shrug of the shoulders he turned upon his heel.Undoubtedly he thought I had gone mad.I have made a very important discovery.His eyes flashed with excitement. His hand was lifted in a menacingattitude. For a moment neither of us spoke. It is hard to say which wasmost excited.You dont mean to say that you have any idea of the meaning of thescrawlI do was my desperate reply. Look at the sentence as dictated byyou.Well but it means nothing was the angry answer.Nothing if you read from left to right but mark if from right toleftBackwards cried my uncle in wild amazement. Oh most cunningSaknussemm and I to be such a blockheadHe snatched up the document gazed at it with haggard eye and read itout as I had done.It read as follows iIn Sneffels Yoculis craterem kem delibat umbra Scartaris Julii intra calendas descende audas viator et terrestre centrum attinges. Kod feci. Arne SaknussemmiWhich dog Latin being translated reads as follows Descend into the crater of Yocul of Sneffels which the shade of Scartaris caresses before the kalends of July audacious traveler and you will reach the centre of the earth. I did it. ARNE SAKNUSSEMMMy uncle leaped three feet from the ground with joy. He looked radiantand handsome. He rushed about the room wild with delight andsatisfaction. He knocked over tables and chairs. He threw his booksabout until at last utterly exhausted he fell into his armchair.Whats oclock he asked.About three.My dinner does not seem to have done me much good he observed. Letme have something to eat. We can then start at once. Get my portmanteauready.What forAnd your own he continued. We start at once.My horror may be conceived. I resolved however to show no fear.Scientific reasons were the only ones likely to influence my uncle. Nowthere were many against this terrible journey. The very idea of goingdown to the centre of the earth was simply absurd. I determinedtherefore to argue the point after dinner.My uncles rage was now directed against the cook for having no dinnerready. My explanation however satisfied him and having gotten the keyshe soon contrived to get sufficient to satisfy our voracious appetites.During the repast my uncle was rather gay than otherwise. He made someof those peculiar jokes which belong exclusively to the learned. Assoon however as dessert was over he called me to his study. We eachtook a chair on opposite sides of the table.Henry he said in a soft and winning voice I have always believedyou ingenious and you have rendered me a service never to be forgotten.Without you this great this wondrous discovery would never have beenmade. It is my duty therefore to insist on your sharing the glory.He is in a good humor thought I Ill soon let him know my opinionof glory.In the first place he continued you must keep the whole affair aprofound secret. There is no more envious race of men than scientificdiscoverers. Many would start on the same journey. At all events wewill be the first in the field.I doubt your having many competitors was my reply.A man of real scientific acquirements would be delighted at the chance.We should find a perfect stream of pilgrims on the traces of ArneSaknussemm if this document were once made public.But my dear sir is not this paper very likely to be a hoax I urged.The book in which we find it is sufficient proof of its authenticityhe replied.I thoroughly allow that the celebrated Professor wrote the lines butonly I believe as a kind of mystification was my answer.Scarcely were the words out of my mouth when I was sorry I had utteredthem. My uncle looked at me with a dark and gloomy scowl and I began tobe alarmed for the results of our conversation. His mood soon changedhowever and a smile took the place of a frown.We shall see he remarked with decisive emphasis.But see what is all this about Yocul and Sneffels and thisScartaris I have never heard anything about them.The very point to which I am coming. I lately received from my friendAugustus Peterman of Leipzig a map. Take down the third atlas from thesecond shelf series Z plate .I rose went to the shelf and presently returned with the volumeindicated.This said my uncle is one of the best maps of Iceland. I believe itwill settle all your doubts difficulties and objections.With a grim hope to the contrary I stooped over the map.CHAPTER WE START ON THE JOURNEYYou see the whole island is composed of volcanoes said theProfessor and remark carefully that they all bear the name of Yocul.The word is Icelandic and means a glacier. In most of the loftymountains of that region the volcanic eruptions come forth from iceboundcaverns. Hence the name applied to every volcano on this extraordinaryisland.But what does this word Sneffels meanTo this question I expected no rational answer. I was mistaken.Follow my finger to the western coast of Iceland there you seeReykjavik its capital. Follow the direction of one of its innumerablefjords or arms of the sea and what do you see below the sixtyfifthdegree of latitudeA peninsulavery like a thighbone in shape.And in the centre of itA mountain.Well thats Sneffels.I had nothing to say.That is Sneffelsa mountain about five thousand feet in height one ofthe most remarkable in the whole island and certainly doomed to be themost celebrated in the world for through its crater we shall reach thecentre of the earth.Impossible cried I startled and shocked at the thought.Why impossible said Professor Hardwigg in his severest tones.Because its crater is choked with lava by burning rocksby infinitedangers.But if it be extinctThat would make a difference.Of course it would. There are about three hundred volcanoes on thewhole surface of the globebut the greater number are extinct. Of theseSneffels is one. No eruption has occurred since in fact it hasceased to be a volcano at all.After this what more could I say YesI thought of another objection.But what is all this about Scartaris and the kalends of JulyMy uncle reflected deeply. Presently he gave forth the result of hisreflections in a sententious tone. What appears obscure to you to meis light. This very phrase shows how particular Saknussemm is in hisdirections. The Sneffels mountain has many craters. He is carefultherefore to point the exact one which is the highway into the Interiorof the Earth. He lets us know for this purpose that about the end ofthe month of June the shadow of Mount Scartaris falls upon the onecrater. There can be no doubt about the matter.My uncle had an answer for everything.I accept all your explanations I said and Saknussemm is right. Hefound out the entrance to the bowels of the earth he has indicatedcorrectly but that he or anyone else ever followed up the discovery ismadness to suppose.Why so young manAll scientific teaching theoretical and practical shows it to beimpossible.I care nothing for theories retorted my uncle.But is it not wellknown that heat increases one degree for everyseventy feet you descend into the earth Which gives a fine idea of thecentral heat. All the matters which compose the globe are in a state ofincandescence even gold platinum and the hardest rocks are in a stateof fusion. What would become of usDont be alarmed at the heat my boy.How soNeither you nor anybody else know anything about the real state of theearths interior. All modern experiments tend to explode the oldertheories. Were any such heat to exist the upper crust of the earthwould be shattered to atoms and the world would be at an end.A long learned and not uninteresting discussion followed which endedin this wiseI do not believe in the dangers and difficulties which you Henry seemto multiply and the only way to learn is like Arne Saknussemm to goand see.Well cried I overcome at last let us go and see. Though how we cando that in the dark is another mystery.Fear nothing. We shall overcome these and many other difficulties.Besides as we approach the centre I expect to find it luminousNothing is impossible.And now that we have come to a thorough understanding not a word toany living soul. Our success depends on secrecy and dispatch.Thus ended our memorable conference which roused a perfect fever in me.Leaving my uncle I went forth like one possessed. Reaching the banks ofthe Elbe I began to think. Was all I had heard really and trulypossible Was my uncle in his sober senses and could the interior ofthe earth be reached Was I the victim of a madman or was he adiscoverer of rare courage and grandeur of conceptionTo a certain extent I was anxious to be off. I was afraid my enthusiasmwould cool. I determined to pack up at once. At the end of an hourhowever on my way home I found that my feelings had very much changed.Im all abroad I cried tis a nightmareI must have dreamed it.At this moment I came face to face with Gretchen whom I warmlyembraced.So you have come to meet me she said how good of you. But what isthe matterWell it was no use mincing the matter I told her all. She listenedwith awe and for some minutes she could not speak.Well I at last said rather anxiously.What a magnificent journey. If I were only a man A journey worthy ofthe nephew of Professor Hardwigg. I should look upon it as an honor toaccompany him.My dear Gretchen I thought you would be the first to cry out againstthis mad enterprise.No on the contrary I glory in it. It is magnificent splendidanidea worthy of my father. Henry Lawson I envy you.This was as it were conclusive. The final blow of all.When we entered the house we found my uncle surrounded by workmen andporters who were packing up. He was pulling and hauling at a bell.Where have you been wasting your time Your portmanteau is notpackedmy papers are not in orderthe precious tailor has not broughtmy clothes nor my gaitersthe key of my carpet bag is goneI looked at him stupefied. And still he tugged away at the bell.We are really off then I said.Yesof course and yet you go out for a stroll unfortunate boyAnd when do we goThe day after tomorrow at daybreak.I heard no more but darted off to my little bedchamber and lockedmyself in. There was no doubt about it now. My uncle had been hard atwork all the afternoon. The garden was full of ropes rope ladderstorches gourds iron clamps crowbars alpenstocks andpickaxesenough to load ten men.I passed a terrible night. I was called early the next day to learn thatthe resolution of my uncle was unchanged and irrevocable. I also foundmy cousin and affianced wife as warm on the subject as was her father.Next day at five oclock in the morning the post chaise was at thedoor. Gretchen and the old cook received the keys of the house andscarcely pausing to wish anyone goodby we started on our adventurousjourney into the centre of the earth.CHAPTER First Lessons in ClimbingAt Altona a suburb of Hamburg is the Chief Station of the Kielrailway which was to take us to the shores of the Belt. In twentyminutes from the moment of our departure we were in Holstein and ourcarriage entered the station. Our heavy luggage was taken out weighedlabeled and placed in a huge van. We then took our tickets and exactlyat seven oclock were seated opposite each other in a firstclass railwaycarriage.My uncle said nothing. He was too busy examining his papers among whichof course was the famous parchment and some letters of introductionfrom the Danish consul which were to pave the way to an introduction tothe Governor of Iceland. My only amusement was looking out of thewindow. But as we passed through a flat though fertile country thisoccupation was slightly monotonous. In three hours we reached Kiel andour baggage was at once transferred to the steamer.We had now a day before us a delay of about ten hours. Which fact putmy uncle in a towering passion. We had nothing to do but to walk aboutthe pretty town and bay. At length however we went on board and athalf past ten were steaming down the Great Belt. It was a dark nightwith a strong breeze and a rough sea nothing being visible but theoccasional fires on shore with here and there a lighthouse. At seven inthe morning we left Korsor a little town on the western side ofSeeland.Here we took another railway which in three hours brought us to thecapital Copenhagen where scarcely taking time for refreshment myuncle hurried out to present one of his letters of introduction. It wasto the director of the Museum of Antiquities who having been informedthat we were tourists bound for Iceland did all he could to assist us.One wretched hope sustained me now. Perhaps no vessel was bound for suchdistant parts.Alas a little Danish schooner the iValkyriei was to sail on thesecond of June for Reykjavik. The captain M. Bjarne was on board andwas rather surprised at the energy and cordiality with which his futurepassenger shook him by the hand. To him a voyage to Iceland was merely amatter of course. My uncle on the other hand considered the event ofsublime importance. The honest sailor took advantage of the Professorsenthusiasm to double the fare.On Tuesday morning at seven oclock be on board said M. Bjarnehanding us our receipts.Excellent Capital Glorious remarked my uncle as we sat down to alate breakfast refresh yourself my boy and we will take a runthrough the town.Our meal concluded we went to the KongensNyeTorw to the kingsmagnificent palace to the beautiful bridge over the canal near theMuseum to the immense cenotaph of Thorwaldsen with its hideous navalgroups to the castle of Rosenberg and to all the other lions of theplacenone of which my uncle even saw so absorbed was he in hisanticipated triumphs.But one thing struck his fancy and that was a certain singular steeplesituated on the Island of Amak which is the southeast quarter of thecity of Copenhagen. My uncle at once ordered me to turn my steps thatway and accordingly we went on board the steam ferry boat which doesduty on the canal and very soon reached the noted dockyard quay.In the first instance we crossed some narrow streets where we metnumerous groups of galley slaves with particolored trousers grey andyellow working under the orders and the sticks of severe taskmastersand finally reached the VorFrelsersKirk.This church exhibited nothing remarkable in itself in fact the worthyProfessor had only been attracted to it by one circumstance which wasthat its rather elevated steeple started from a circular platform afterwhich there was an exterior staircase which wound round to the verysummit.Let us ascend said my uncle.But I never could climb church towers I cried I am subject todizziness in my head.The very reason why you should go up. I want to cure you of a badhabit.But my good sirI tell you to come. What is the use of wasting so much valuable timeIt was impossible to dispute the dictatorial commands of my uncle. Iyielded with a groan. On payment of a fee a verger gave us the key. Hefor one was not partial to the ascent. My uncle at once showed me theway running up the steps like a schoolboy. I followed as well as Icould though no sooner was I outside the tower than my head began toswim. There was nothing of the eagle about me. The earth was enough forme and no ambitious desire to soar ever entered my mind. Still thingsdid not go badly until I had ascended steps and was near theplatform when I began to feel the rush of cold air. I could scarcelystand when clutching the railings I looked upwards. The railing wasfrail enough but nothing to those which skirted the terrible windingstaircase that appeared from where I stood to ascend to the skies.Now then Henry.I cant do it I cried in accents of despair.Are you after all a coward sir said my uncle in a pitiless tone.Go up I sayTo this there was no reply possible. And yet the keen air actedviolently on my nervous system sky earth all seemed to swim roundwhile the steeple rocked like a ship. My legs gave way like those of adrunken man. I crawled upon my hands and knees I hauled myself upslowly crawling like a snake. Presently I closed my eyes and allowedmyself to be dragged upwards.Look around you said my uncle in a stern voice heaven knows whatprofound abysses you may have to look down. This is excellent practice.Slowly and shivering all the while with cold I opened my eyes. Whatthen did I see My first glance was upwards at the cold fleecy cloudswhich as by some optical delusion appeared to stand still while thesteeple the weathercock and our two selves were carried swiftly along.Far away on one side could be seen the grassy plain while on the otherlay the sea bathed in translucent light. The Sund or Sound as we callit could be discovered beyond the point of Elsinore crowded with whitesails which at that distance looked like the wings of seagulls whileto the east could be made out the faroff coast of Sweden. The wholeappeared a magic panorama.But faint and bewildered as I was there was no remedy for it. Rise andstand up I must. Despite my protestations my first lesson lasted quitean hour. When nearly two hours later I reached the bosom of motherearth I was like a rheumatic old man bent double with pain.Enough for one day said my uncle rubbing his hands we will beginagain tomorrow.There was no remedy. My lessons lasted five days and at the end of thatperiod I ascended blithely enough and found myself able to look downinto the depths below without even winking and with some degree ofpleasure.CHAPTER Our Voyage to IcelandThe hour of departure came at last. The night before the worthy Mr.Thompson brought us the most cordial letters of introduction for BaronTrampe Governor of Iceland for M. Pictursson coadjutor to the bishopand for M. Finsen mayor of the town of Reykjavik. In return my unclenearly crushed his hands so warmly did he shake them.On the second of the month at two in the morning our precious cargo ofluggage was taken on board the good ship iValkyriei. We followed andwere very politely introduced by the captain to a small cabin with twostanding bed places neither very well ventilated nor very comfortable.But in the cause of science men are expected to suffer.Well and have we a fair wind cried my uncle in his most mellifluousaccents.An excellent wind replied Captain Bjarne we shall leave the Soundgoing free with all sails set.A few minutes afterwards the schooner started before the wind underall the canvas she could carry and entered the channel. An hour laterthe capital of Denmark seemed to sink into the waves and we were at nogreat distance from the coast of Elsinore. My uncle was delighted formyself moody and dissatisfied I appeared almost to expect a glimpse ofthe ghost of Hamlet.Sublime madman thought I you doubtless would approve ourproceedings. You might perhaps even follow us to the centre of theearth there to resolve your eternal doubts.But no ghost or anything else appeared upon the ancient walls. The factis the castle is much later than the time of the heroic prince ofDenmark. It is now the residence of the keeper of the Strait of theSound and through that Sound more than fifteen thousand vessels of allnations pass every year.The castle of Kronborg soon disappeared in the murky atmosphere as wellas the tower of Helsinborg which raises its head on the Swedish Bank.And here the schooner began to feel in earnest the breezes of theKattegat. The iValkyriei was swift enough but with all sailing boatsthere is the same uncertainty. Her cargo was coal furniture potterywoolen clothing and a load of corn. As usual the crew was small fiveDanes doing the whole of the work.How long will the voyage last asked my uncle.Well I should think about ten days replied the skipper unlessindeed we meet with some northeast gales among the Faroe Islands.At all events there will be no very considerable delay cried theimpatient Professor.No Mr. Hardwigg said the captain no fear of that. At all eventswe shall get there some day.Towards evening the schooner doubled Cape Skagen the northernmost partof Denmark crossed the Skagerrak during the nightskirted the extremepoint of Norway through the gut of Cape Lindesnes and then reached theNorthern Seas. Two days later we were not far from the coast ofScotland somewhere near what Danish sailors call Peterhead and thenthe iValkyriei stretched out direct for the Faroe Islands betweenOrkney and Shetland. Our vessel now felt the full force of the oceanwaves and the wind shifting we with great difficulty made the FaroeIsles. On the eighth day the captain made out Myganness thewesternmost of the isles and from that moment headed direct forPortland a cape on the southern shores of the singular island for whichwe were bound.The voyage offered no incident worthy of record. I bore it very wellbut my uncle to his great annoyance and even shame was remarkablyseasick This mal de mer troubled him the more that it prevented himfrom questioning Captain Bjarne as to the subject of Sneffels as to themeans of communication and the facilities of transport. All theseexplanations he had to adjourn to the period of his arrival. His timemeanwhile was spent lying in bed groaning and dwelling anxiously onthe hopedfor termination of the voyage. I didnt pity him.On the eleventh day we sighted Cape Portland over which towered MountMyrdals Yokul which the weather being clear we made out very readily.The cape itself is nothing but a huge mount of granite standing nakedand alone to meet the Atlantic waves. The iValkyriei kept off the coaststeering to the westward. On all sides were to be seen whole schoolsof whales and sharks. After some hours we came in sight of a solitaryrock in the ocean forming a mighty vault through which the foamingwaves poured with intense fury. The islets of Westman appeared to leapfrom the ocean being so low in the water as scarcely to be seen untilyou were right upon them. From that moment the schooner was steered tothe westward in order to round Cape Reykjanes the western point ofIceland.My uncle to his great disgust was unable even to crawl on deck soheavy a sea was on and thus lost the first view of the Land of Promise.Fortyeight hours later after a storm which drove us far to sea underbare poles we came once more in sight of land and were boarded by apilot who after three hours of dangerous navigation brought theschooner safely to an anchor in the bay of Faxa before Reykjavik.My uncle came out of his cabin pale haggard thin but full ofenthusiasm his eyes dilated with pleasure and satisfaction. Nearly thewhole population of the town was on foot to see us land. The fact wasthat scarcely any one of them but expected some goods by the periodicalvessel.Professor Hardwigg was in haste to leave his prison or rather as hecalled it his hospital but before he attempted to do so he caughthold of my hand led me to the quarterdeck of the schooner took my armwith his left hand and pointed inland with his right over the northernpart of the bay to where rose a high twopeaked mountaina double conecovered with eternal snow.Behold he whispered in an awestricken voice beholdMount SneffelsThen without further remark he put his finger to his lips frowneddarkly and descended into the small boat which awaited us. I followedand in a few minutes we stood upon the soil of mysterious IcelandScarcely were we fairly on shore when there appeared before us a man ofexcellent appearance wearing the costume of a military officer. He washowever but a civil servant a magistrate the governor of theislandBaron Trampe. The Professor knew whom he had to deal with. Hetherefore handed him the letters from Copenhagen and a briefconversation in Danish followed to which I of course was a strangerand for a very good reason for I did not know the language in whichthey conversed. I afterwards heard however that Baron Trampe placedhimself entirely at the beck and call of Professor Hardwigg.My uncle was most graciously received by M. Finsen the mayor who asfar as costume went was quite as military as the governor but alsofrom character and occupation quite as pacific. As for his coadjutor M.Pictursson he was absent on an episcopal visit to the northern portionof the diocese. We were therefore compelled to defer the pleasure ofbeing presented to him. His absence was however more than compensatedby the presence of M. Fridriksson professor of natural science in thecollege of Reykjavik a man of invaluable ability. This modest scholarspoke no languages save Icelandic and Latin. When therefore headdressed himself to me in the language of Horace we at once came tounderstand one another. He was in fact the only person that I didthoroughly understand during the whole period of my residence in thisbenighted island.Out of three rooms of which his house was composed two were placed atour service and in a few hours we were installed with all our baggagethe amount of which rather astonished the simple inhabitants ofReykjavik.Now Harry said my uncle rubbing his hands an goes well the worsedifficulty is now over.How the worse difficulty over I cried in fresh amazement.Doubtless. Here we are in Iceland. Nothing more remains but to descendinto the bowels of the earth.Well sir to a certain extent you are right. We have only to godownbut as far as I am concerned that is not the question. I want toknow how we are to get up again.That is the least part of the business and does not in any way troubleme. In the meantime there is not an hour to lose. I am about to visitthe public library. Very likely I may find there some manuscripts fromthe hand of Saknussemm. I shall be glad to consult them.In the meanwhile I replied I will take a walk through the town.Will you not likewise do soI feel no interest in the subject said my uncle. What for me iscurious in this island is not what is above the surface but what isbelow.I bowed by way of reply put on my hat and furred cloak and went out.It was not an easy matter to lose oneself in the two streets ofReykjavik I had therefore no need to ask my way. The town lies on aflat and marshy plain between two hills. A vast field of lava skirts iton one side falling away in terraces towards the sea. On the other handis the large bay of Faxa bordered on the north by the enormous glacierof Sneffels and in which bay the iValkyriei was then the only vessel atanchor. Generally there were one or two English or French gunboats towatch and protect the fisheries in the offing. They were now howeverabsent on duty.The longest of the streets of Reykjavik runs parallel to the shore. Inthis street the merchants and traders live in wooden huts made withbeams of wood painted redmere log huts such as you find in the wildsof America. The other street situated more to the west runs toward alittle lake between the residences of the bishop and the otherpersonages not engaged in commerce.I had soon seen all I wanted of these weary and dismal thoroughfares.Here and there was a strip of discolored turf like an old wornout bitof woolen carpet and now and then a bit of kitchen garden in whichgrew potatoes cabbage and lettuce almost diminutive enough to suggestthe idea of Lilliput.In the centre of the new commercial street I found the public cemeteryenclosed by an earthen wall. Though not very large it appeared notlikely to be filled for centuries. From hence I went to the house of theGovernora mere hut in comparison with the Mansion House ofHamburgbut a palace alongside the other Icelandic houses. Between thelittle lake and the town was the church built in simple Protestantstyle and composed of calcined stones thrown up by volcanic action. Ihave not the slightest doubt that in high winds its red tiles were blownout to the great annoyance of the pastor and congregation. Upon aneminence close at hand was the national school in which were taughtHebrew English French and Danish.In three hours my tour was complete. The general impression upon my mindwas sadness. No trees no vegetation so to speakon all sides volcanicpeaksthe huts of turf and earthmore like roofs than houses. Thanksto the heat of these residences grass grows on the roof which grass iscarefully cut for hay. I saw but few inhabitants during my excursionbut I met a crowd on the beach drying salting and loading codfish theprincipal article of exportation. The men appeared robust but heavyfairhaired like Germans but of pensive mienexiles of a higher scalein the ladder of humanity than the Eskimos but I thought much moreunhappy since with superior perceptions they are compelled to livewithin the limits of the Polar Circle.Sometimes they gave vent to a convulsive laugh but by no chance didthey smile. Their costume consists of a coarse capote of black woolknown in Scandinavian countries as the vadmel a broadbrimmed hattrousers of red serge and a piece of leather tied with strings for ashoea coarse kind of moccasin. The women though sadlooking andmournful had rather agreeable features without much expression. Theywear a bodice and petticoat of somber vadmel. When unmarried they wear alittle brown knitted cap over a crown of plaited hair but when marriedthey cover their heads with a colored handkerchief over which they tiea white scarf.CHAPTER Conversation and DiscoveryWhen I returned dinner was ready. This meal was devoured by my worthyrelative with avidity and voracity. His shipboard diet had turned hisinterior into a perfect gulf. The repast which was more Danish thanIcelandic was in itself nothing but the excessive hospitality of ourhost made us enjoy it doubly.The conversation turned upon scientific matters and M. Fridrikssonasked my uncle what he thought of the public library.Library sir cried my uncle it appears to me a collection ofuseless odd volumes and a beggarly amount of empty shelves.What cried M. Fridriksson why we have eight thousand volumes ofmost rare and valuable workssome in the Scandinavian language besidesall the new publications from Copenhagen.Eight thousand volumes my dear sirwhy where are they cried myuncle.Scattered over the country Professor Hardwigg. We are very studiousmy dear sir though we do live in Iceland. Every farmer every laborerevery fisherman can both read and writeand we think that books insteadof being locked up in cupboards far from the sight of students shouldbe distributed as widely as possible. The books of our library aretherefore passed from hand to hand without returning to the libraryshelves perhaps for years.Then when foreigners visit you there is nothing for them to seeWell sir foreigners have their own libraries and our firstconsideration is that our humbler classes should be highly educated.Fortunately the love of study is innate in the Icelandic people. In we founded a Literary Society and Mechanics Institute manyforeign scholars of eminence are honorary members we publish booksdestined to educate our people and these books have rendered valuableservices to our country. Allow me to have the honor Professor Hardwiggto enroll you as an honorary memberMy uncle who already belonged to nearly every literary and scientificinstitution in Europe immediately yielded to the amiable wishes of goodM. Fridriksson.And now he said after many expressions of gratitude and good willif you will tell me what books you expected to find perhaps I may beof some assistance to you.I watched my uncle keenly. For a minute or two he hesitated as ifunwilling to speak to speak openly was perhaps to unveil hisprojects. Nevertheless after some reflection he made up his mind.Well M. Fridriksson he said in an easy unconcerned kind of way Iwas desirous of ascertaining if among other valuable works you had anyof the learned Arne Saknussemm.Arne Saknussemm cried the Professor of Reykjavik you speak of oneof the most distinguished scholars of the sixteenth century of thegreat naturalist the great alchemist the great traveler.Exactly so.One of the most distinguished men connected with Icelandic science andliterature.As you say sirA man illustrious above all.Yes sir all this is true but his worksWe have none of them.Not in IcelandThere are none in Iceland or elsewhere answered the other sadly.Why soBecause Arne Saknussemm was persecuted for heresy and in hisworks were publicly burnt at Copenhagen by the hands of the commonhangman.Very good capital murmured my uncle to the great astonishment ofthe worthy Icelander.You said sirYes yes all is clear I see the link in the chain everything isexplained and I now understand why Arne Saknussemm put out of courtforced to hide his magnificent discoveries was compelled to concealbeneath the veil of an incomprehensible cryptograph the secretWhat secretA secretwhich stammered my uncle.Have you discovered some wonderful manuscript cried M. Fridriksson.No no I was carried away by my enthusiasm. A mere supposition.Very good sir. But really to turn to another subject I hope youwill not leave our island without examining into its mineralogicalriches.Well the fact is I am rather late. So many learned men have been herebefore me.Yes yes but there is still much to be done cried M. Fridriksson.You think so said my uncle his eyes twinkling with hiddensatisfaction.Yes you have no idea how many unknown mountains glaciers volcanoesthere are which remain to be studied. Without moving from where we sitI can show you one. Yonder on the edge of the horizon you seeSneffels.Oh yes Sneffels said my uncle.One of the most curious volcanoes in existence the crater of which hasbeen rarely visited.ExtinctExtinct any time these five hundred years was the ready reply.Well said my uncle who dug his nails into his flesh and pressed hisknees tightly together to prevent himself leaping up with joy. I have agreat mind to begin my studies with an examination of the geologicalmysteries of this Mount SeffelFeiselwhat do you call itSneffels my dear sir.This portion of the conversation took place in Latin and I thereforeunderstood all that had been said. I could scarcely keep my countenancewhen I found my uncle so cunningly concealing his delight andsatisfaction. I must confess that his artful grimaces put on to concealhis happiness made him look like a new Mephistopheles.Yes yes he continued your proposition delights me. I will endeavorto climb to the summit of Sneffels and if possible will descend intoits crater.I very much regret continued M. Fridriksson that my occupation willentirely preclude the possibility of my accompanying you. It would havebeen both pleasurable and profitable if I could have spared the time.No no a thousand times no cried my uncle. I do not wish to disturbthe serenity of any man. I thank you however with all my heart. Thepresence of one so learned as yourself would no doubt have been mostuseful but the duties of your office and profession before everything.In the innocence of his simple heart our host did not perceive theirony of these remarks.I entirely approve your project continued the Icelander after somefurther remarks. It is a good idea to begin by examining this volcano.You will make a harvest of curious observations. In the first place howdo you propose to get to SneffelsBy sea. I shall cross the bay. Of course that is the most rapid route.Of course. But still it cannot be done.WhyWe have not an available boat in all Reykjavik replied the other.What is to be doneYou must go by land along the coast. It is longer but much moreinteresting.Then I must have a guide.Of course and I have your very man.Somebody on whom I can depend.Yes an inhabitant of the peninsula on which Sneffels is situated. Heis a very shrewd and worthy man with whom you will be pleased. Hespeaks Danish like a Dane.When can I see himtodayNo tomorrow he will not be here before.Tomorrow be it replied my uncle with a deep sigh.The conversation ended by compliments on both sides. During the dinnermy uncle had learned much as to the history of Arne Saknussemm thereasons for his mysterious and hieroglyphical document. He also becameaware that his host would not accompany him on his adventurousexpedition and that next day we should have a guide.CHAPTER THE EIDERDOWN HUNTEROFF AT LASTThat evening I took a brief walk on the shore near Reykjavik afterwhich I returned to an early sleep on my bed of coarse planks where Islept the sleep of the just. When I awoke I heard my uncle speakingloudly in the next room. I rose hastily and joined him. He was talkingin Danish with a man of tall stature and of perfectly Herculean build.This man appeared to be possessed of very great strength. His eyeswhich started rather prominently from a very large head the facebelonging to which was simple and naive appeared very quick andintelligent. Very long hair which even in England would have beenaccounted exceedingly red fell over his athletic shoulders. This nativeof Iceland was active and supple in appearance though he scarcely movedhis arms being in fact one of those men who despise the habit ofgesticulation common to southern people.Everything in this mans manner revealed a calm and phlegmatictemperament. There was nothing indolent about him but his appearancespoke of tranquillity. He was one of those who never seemed to expectanything from anybody who liked to work when he thought proper andwhose philosophy nothing could astonish or trouble.I began to comprehend his character simply from the way in which helistened to the wild and impassioned verbiage of my worthy uncle. Whilethe excellent Professor spoke sentence after sentence he stood withfolded arms utterly still motionless to all my uncles gesticulations.When he wanted to say No he moved his head from left to right when heacquiesced he nodded so slightly that you could scarcely see theundulation of his head. This economy of motion was carried to the lengthof avarice.Judging from his appearance I should have been a long time before I hadsuspected him to be what he was a mighty hunter. Certainly his mannerwas not likely to frighten the game. How then did he contrive to getat his preyMy surprise was slightly modified when I knew that this tranquil andsolemn personage was only a hunter of the eider duck the down of whichis after all the greatest source of the Icelanders wealth.In the early days of summer the female of the eider a pretty sort ofduck builds its nest amid the rocks of the fjordsthe name given toall narrow gulfs in Scandinavian countrieswith which every part of theisland is indented. No sooner has the eider duck made her nest than shelines the inside of it with the softest down from her breast. Then comesthe hunter or trader taking away the nest the poor bereaved femalebegins her task over again and this continues as long as any eider downis to be found.When she can find no more the male bird sets to work to see what he cando. As however his down is not so soft and has therefore nocommercial value the hunter does not take the trouble to rob him of hisnest lining. The nest is accordingly finished the eggs are laid thelittle ones are born and next year the harvest of eider down is againcollected.Now as the eider duck never selects steep rocks or aspects to build itsnest but rather sloping and low cliffs near to the sea the Icelandichunter can carry on his trade operations without much difficulty. He islike a farmer who has neither to plow to sow nor to harrow only tocollect his harvest.This grave sententious silent person as phlegmatic as an Englishmanon the French stage was named Hans Bjelke. He had called upon us inconsequence of the recommendation of M. Fridriksson. He was in factour future guide. It struck me that had I sought the world over I couldnot have found a greater contradiction to my impulsive uncle.They however readily understood one another. Neither of them had anythought about money one was ready to take all that was offered him theother ready to offer anything that was asked. It may readily beconceived then that an understanding was soon come to between them.Now the understanding was that he was to take us to the village ofStapi situated on the southern slope of the peninsula of Sneffels atthe very foot of the volcano. Hans the guide told us the distance wasabout twentytwo miles a journey which my uncle supposed would takeabout two days.But when my uncle came to understand that they were Danish miles ofeight thousand yards each he was obliged to be more moderate in hisideas and considering the horrible roads we had to follow to alloweight or ten days for the journey.Four horses were prepared for us two to carry the baggage and two tobear the important weight of myself and uncle. Hans declared thatnothing ever would make him climb on the back of any animal. He knewevery inch of that part of the coast and promised to take us the veryshortest way.His engagement with my uncle was by no means to cease with our arrivalat Stapi he was further to remain in his service during the whole timerequired for the completion of his scientific investigations at thefixed salary of three rixdollars a week being exactly fourteenshillings and twopence minus one farthing English currency. Onestipulation however was made by the guidethe money was to be paid tohim every Saturday night failing which his engagement was at an end.The day of our departure was fixed. My uncle wished to hand theeiderdown hunter an advance but he refused in one emphatic wordEfter.Which being translated from Icelandic into plain English meansAfter.The treaty concluded our worthy guide retired without another word.A splendid fellow said my uncle only he little suspects themarvelous part he is about to play in the history of the world.You mean then I cried in amazement that he should accompany usTo the interior of the earth yes replied my uncle. Why notThere were yet fortyeight hours to elapse before we made our finalstart. To my great regret our whole time was taken up in makingpreparations for our journey. All our industry and ability were devotedto packing every object in the most advantageous mannerthe instrumentson one side the arms on the other the tools here and the provisionsthere. There were in fact four distinct groups.The instruments were of course of the best manufacture. A centigrade thermometer of Eigel counting up to degrees whichto me did not appear half enoughor too much. Too hot by half if thedegree of heat was to ascend so highin which case we should certainlybe cookednot enough if we wanted to ascertain the exact temperatureof springs or metal in a state of fusion.. A manometer worked by compressed air an instrument used to ascertainthe upper atmospheric pressure on the level of the ocean. Perhaps acommon barometer would not have done as well the atmospheric pressurebeing likely to increase in proportion as we descended below the surfaceof the earth.. A firstclass chronometer made by Boissonnas of Geneva set at themeridian of Hamburg from which Germans calculate as the English dofrom Greenwich and the French from Paris.. Two compasses one for horizontal guidance the other to ascertainthe dip.. A night glass.. Two Ruhmkorff coils which by means of a current of electricitywould ensure us a very excellent easily carried and certain means ofobtaining light.. A voltaic battery on the newest principle. Thermometer ithermosi and imetroni measure an instrument formeasuring the temperature of the air.Manometer imanosiand imetronimeasure an instrument to show the density or rarity ofgases.Chronometer ichronosi. time and imetrosi measure a timemeasurer or superior watchRuhmkorffs coil an instrument forproducing currents of induced electricity of great intensity. Itconsists of a coil of copper wire insulated by being covered with silksurrounded by another coil of fine wire also insulated in which amomentary current is induced when a current is passed through the innercoil from a voltaic battery. When the apparatus is in action the gasbecomes luminous and produces a white and continued light. The batteryand wire are carried in a leather bag which the traveler fastens by astrap to his shoulders. The lantern is in front and enables thebenighted wanderer to see in the most profound obscurity. He may venturewithout fear of explosion into the midst of the most inflammable gasesand the lantern will burn beneath the deepest waters. H. D. Ruhmkorffan able and learned chemist discovered the induction coil. In hewon the quinquennial French prize of for this ingeniousapplication of electricityA voltaic battery so called from Volta itsdesigner is an apparatus consisting of a series of metal platesarranged in pairs and subjected to the action of saline solutions forproducing currents of electricity.Our arms consisted of two rifles with two revolving sixshooters. Whythese arms were provided it was impossible for me to say. I had everyreason to believe that we had neither wild beasts nor savage natives tofear. My uncle on the other hand was quite as devoted to his arsenalas to his collection of instruments and above all was very careful withhis provision of fulminating or gun cotton warranted to keep in anyclimate and of which the expansive force was known to be greater thanthat of ordinary gunpowder.Our tools consisted of two pickaxes two crowbars a silken ladderthree ironshod Alpine poles a hatchet a hammer a dozen wedges somepointed pieces of iron and a quantity of strong rope. You may conceivethat the whole made a tolerable parcel especially when I mention thatthe ladder itself was three hundred feet longThen there came the important question of provisions. The hamper was notvery large but tolerably satisfactory for I knew that in concentratedessence of meat and biscuit there was enough to last six months. Theonly liquid provided by my uncle was Schiedam. Of water not a drop. Wehad however an ample supply of gourds and my uncle counted on findingwater and enough to fill them as soon as we commenced our downwardjourney. My remarks as to the temperature the quality and even as tothe possibility of none being found remained wholly without effect.To make up the exact list of our traveling gearfor the guidance offuture travelersadd that we carried a medicine and surgical chestwith all apparatus necessary for wounds fractures and blows lintscissors lancetsin fact a perfect collection of horrible lookinginstruments a number of vials containing ammonia alcohol etherGoulard water aromatic vinegar in fact every possible and impossibledrugfinally all the materials for working the Ruhmkorff coilMy uncle had also been careful to lay in a goodly supply of tobaccoseveral flasks of very fine gunpowder boxes of tinder besides a largebelt crammed full of notes and gold. Good boots rendered watertight wereto be found to the number of six in the tool box.My boy with such clothing with such boots and such generalequipment said my uncle in a state of rapturous delight we may hopeto travel far.It took a whole day to put all these matters in order. In the evening wedined with Baron Trampe in company with the Mayor of Reykjavik andDoctor Hyaltalin the great medical man of Iceland. M. Fridriksson wasnot present and I was afterwards sorry to hear that he and the governordid not agree on some matters connected with the administration of theisland. Unfortunately the consequence was that I did not understand aword that was said at dinnera kind of semiofficial reception. Onething I can say my uncle never left off speaking.The next day our labor came to an end. Our worthy host delighted myuncle Professor Hardwigg by giving him a good map of Iceland a mostimportant and precious document for a mineralogist.Our last evening was spent in a long conversation with M. Fridrikssonwhom I liked very muchthe more that I never expected to see him oranyone else again. After this agreeable way of spending an hour or so Itried to sleep. In vain with the exception of a few dozes my night wasmiserable.At five oclock in the morning I was awakened from the only real halfhours sleep of the night by the loud neighing of horses under mywindow. I hastily dressed myself and went down into the street. Hans wasengaged in putting the finishing stroke to our baggage which he did ina silent quiet way that won my admiration and yet he did it admirablywell. My uncle wasted a great deal of breath in giving him directionsbut worthy Hans took not the slightest notice of his words.At six oclock all our preparations were completed and M. Fridrikssonshook hands heartily with us. My uncle thanked him warmly in theIcelandic language for his kind hospitality speaking truly from theheart.As for myself I put together a few of my best Latin phrases and paid himthe highest compliments I could. This fraternal and friendly dutyperformed we sallied forth and mounted our horses.As soon as we were quite ready M. Fridriksson advanced and by way offarewell called after me in the words of Virgilwords which appearedto have been made for us travelers starting for an uncertaindestinationEt quacunque viam dederit fortuna sequamur.And whichsoever way thou goest may fortune followCHAPTER OUR STARTWE MEET WITH ADVENTURES BY THE WAYThe weather was overcast but settled when we commenced our adventurousand perilous journey. We had neither to fear fatiguing heat nordrenching rain. It was in fact real tourist weather.As there was nothing I liked better than horse exercise the pleasure ofriding through an unknown country caused the early part of ourenterprise to be particularly agreeable to me.I began to enjoy the exhilarating delight of traveling a life ofdesire gratification and liberty. The truth is that my spirits rose sorapidly that I began to be indifferent to what had once appeared to bea terrible journey.After all I said to myself what do I risk Simply to take a journeythrough a curious country to climb a remarkable mountain and if theworst comes to the worst to descend into the crater of an extinctvolcano.There could be no doubt that this was all this terrible Saknussemm haddone. As to the existence of a gallery or of subterraneous passagesleading into the interior of the earth the idea was simply absurd thehallucination of a distempered imagination. All then that may berequired of me I will do cheerfully and will create no difficulty.It was just before we left Reykjavik that I came to this decision.Hans our extraordinary guide went first walking with a steady rapidunvarying step. Our two horses with the luggage followed of their ownaccord without requiring whip or spur. My uncle and I came behindcutting a very tolerable figure upon our small but vigorous animals.Iceland is one of the largest islands in Europe. It contains thirtythousand square miles of surface and has about seventy thousandinhabitants. Geographers have divided it into four parts and we had tocross the southwest quarter which in the vernacular is called SudvestrFjordungr.Hans on taking his departure from Reykjavik had followed the line ofthe sea. We took our way through poor and sparse meadows which made adesperate effort every year to show a little green. They very rarelysucceed in a good show of yellow.The rugged summits of the rocky hills were dimly visible on the edge ofthe horizon through the misty fogs every now and then some heavyflakes of snow showed conspicuous in the morning light while certainlofty and pointed rocks were first lost in the grey low clouds theirsummits clearly visible above like jagged reefs rising from a troubloussea.Every now and then a spur of rock came down through the arid groundleaving us scarcely room to pass. Our horses however appeared not onlywell acquainted with the country but by a kind of instinct knew whichwas the best road. My uncle had not even the satisfaction of urgingforward his steed by whip spur or voice. It was utterly useless toshow any signs of impatience. I could not help smiling to see him lookso big on his little horse his long legs now and then touching theground made him look like a sixfooted centaur.Good beast good beast he would cry. I assure you that I begin tothink no animal is more intelligent than an Icelandic horse. Snowtempest impracticable roads rocks icebergsnothing stops him. He isbrave he is sober he is safe he never makes a false step neverglides or slips from his path. I dare to say that if any river anyfjord has to be crossedand I have no doubt there will be manyyouwill see him enter the water without hesitation like an amphibiousanimal and reach the opposite side in safety. We must not howeverattempt to hurry him we must allow him to have his own way and Iwill undertake to say that between us we shall do our ten leagues aday.We may do so was my reply but what about our worthy guideI have not the slightest anxiety about him that sort of people goahead without knowing even what they are about. Look at Hans. He movesso little that it is impossible for him to become fatigued. Besides ifhe were to complain of weariness he could have the loan of my horse. Ishould have a violent attack of the cramp if I were not to have somesort of exercise. My arms are rightbut my legs are getting a littlestiff.All this while we were advancing at a rapid pace. The country we hadreached was already nearly a desert. Here and there could be seen anisolated farm some solitary bur or Icelandic house built of woodearth fragments of lavalooking like beggars on the highway of life.These wretched and miserable huts excited in us such pity that we felthalf disposed to leave alms at every door. In this country there are noroads paths are nearly unknown and vegetation poor as it was slowlyas it reached perfection soon obliterated all traces of the fewtravelers who passed from place to place.Nevertheless this division of the province situated only a few milesfrom the capital is considered one of the best cultivated and mostthickly peopled in all Iceland. What then must be the state of theless known and more distant parts of the island After traveling fullyhalf a Danish mile we had met neither a farmer at the door of his hutnor even a wandering shepherd with his wild and savage flock.A few stray cows and sheep were only seen occasionally. What then mustwe expect when we come to the upheaved regionsto the districts brokenand roughened from volcanic eruptions and subterraneous commotionsWe were to learn this all in good time. I saw however on consultingthe map that we avoided a good deal of this rough country by followingthe winding and desolate shores of the sea. In reality the greatvolcanic movement of the island and all its attendant phenomena areconcentrated in the interior of the island there horizontal layers orstrata of rocks piled one upon the other eruptions of basaltic originand streams of lava have given this country a kind of supernaturalreputation.Little did I expect however the spectacle which awaited us when wereached the peninsula of Sneffels where agglomerations of naturesruins form a kind of terrible chaos.Some two hours or more after we had left the city of Reykjavik wereached the little town called Aoalkirkja or the principal church. Itconsists simply of a few housesnot what in England or Germany weshould call a hamlet.Hans stopped here one half hour. He shared our frugal breakfastanswered Yes and No to my uncles questions as to the nature of theroad and at last when asked where we were to pass the night was aslaconic as usual.Gardar was his oneworded reply.I took occasion to consult the map to see where Gardar was to be found.After looking keenly I found a small town of that name on the borders ofthe Hvalfjord about four miles from Reykjavik. I pointed this out to myuncle who made a very energetic grimace.Only four miles out of twentytwo Why it is only a little walk.He was about to make some energetic observation to the guide but Hanswithout taking the slightest notice of him went in front of the horsesand walked ahead with the same imperturbable phlegm he had alwaysexhibited.Three hours later still traveling over those apparently interminableand sandy prairies we were compelled to go round the Kollafjord aneasier and shorter cut than crossing the gulfs. Shortly after we entereda place of communal jurisdiction called Ejulberg and the clock of whichwould then have struck twelve if any Icelandic church had been richenough to possess so valuable and useful an article. These sacrededifices are however very much like these people who do withoutwatchesand never miss them.Here the horses were allowed to take some rest and refreshment thenfollowing a narrow strip of shore between high rocks and the sea theytook us without further halt to the Aoalkirkja of Brantar and afteranother mile to Saurboer Annexia a chapel of ease situated on thesouthern bank of the Hvalfjord.It was four oclock in the evening and we had traveled four Danishmiles about equal to twenty English.The fjord was in this place about half a mile in width. The sweeping andbroken waves came rolling in upon the pointed rocks the gulf wassurrounded by rocky wallsa mighty cliff three thousand feet inheight remarkable for its brown strata separated here and there bybeds of tufa of a reddish hue. Now whatever may have been theintelligence of our horses I had not the slightest reliance upon themas a means of crossing a stormy arm of the sea. To ride over salt waterupon the back of a little horse seemed to me absurd.If they are really intelligent I said to myself they will certainlynot make the attempt. In any case I shall trust rather to my ownintelligence than theirs.But my uncle was in no humor to wait. He dug his heels into the sides ofhis steed and made for the shore. His horse went to the very edge ofthe water sniffed at the approaching wave and retreated.My uncle who was sooth to say quite as obstinate as the beast hebestrode insisted on his making the desired advance. This attempt wasfollowed by a new refusal on the part of the horse which quietly shookhis head. This demonstration of rebellion was followed by a volley ofwords and a stout application of whipcord also followed by kicks on thepart of the horse which threw its head and heels upwards and tried tothrow his rider. At length the sturdy little pony spreading out hislegs in a stiff and ludicrous attitude got from under the Professorslegs and left him standing with both feet on a separate stone likethe Colossus of Rhodes.Wretched animal cried my uncle suddenly transformed into a footpassengerand as angry and ashamed as a dismounted cavalry officer onthe field of battle.Farja said the guide tapping him familiarly on the shoulder.What a ferry boatDer answered Hans pointing to where lay the boat inquestionthere.Well I cried quite delighted with the information so it is.Why did you not say so before cried my uncle why not start atonceTidvatten said the guide.What does he say I asked considerably puzzled by the delay and thedialogue.He says tide replied my uncle translating the Danish word for myinformation.Of course I understandwe must wait till the tide serves.For bida asked my uncle.Ja replied Hans.My uncle frowned stamped his feet and then followed the horses to wherethe boat lay.I thoroughly understood and appreciated the necessity for waitingbefore crossing the fjord for that moment when the sea at its highestpoint is in a state of slack water. As neither the ebb nor flow can thenbe felt the ferry boat was in no danger of being carried out to sea ordashed upon the rocky coast.The favorable moment did not come until six oclock in the evening. Thenmy uncle myself and guide two boatmen and the four horses got into avery awkward flatbottom boat. Accustomed as I had been to the steamferry boats of the Elbe I found the long oars of the boatmen but sorrymeans of locomotion. We were more than an hour in crossing the fjordbut at length the passage was concluded without accident.Half an hour later we reached Gardar.CHAPTER TRAVELING IN ICELANDIt ought one would have thought to have been night even in thesixtyfifth parallel of latitude but still the nocturnal illuminationdid not surprise me. For in Iceland during the months of June and Julythe sun never sets.The temperature however was very much lower than I expected. I wascold but even that did not affect me so much as ravenous hunger.Welcome indeed therefore was the hut which hospitably opened its doorsto us.It was merely the house of a peasant but in the matter of hospitalityit was worthy of being the palace of a king. As we alighted at the doorthe master of the house came forward held out his hand and without anyfurther ceremony signaled to us to follow him.We followed him for to accompany him was impossible. A long narrowgloomy passage led into the interior of this habitation made from beamsroughly squared by the ax. This passage gave ingress to every room. Thechambers were four in numberthe kitchen the workshop where theweaving was carried on the general sleeping chamber of the family andthe best room to which strangers were especially invited. My unclewhose lofty stature had not been taken into consideration when the housewas built contrived to knock his head against the beams of the roof.We were introduced into our chamber a kind of large room with a hardearthen floor and lighted by a window the panes of which were made ofa sort of parchment from the intestines of sheepvery far fromtransparent.The bedding was composed of dry hay thrown into two long red woodenboxes ornamented with sentences painted in Icelandic. I really had noidea that we should be made so comfortable. There was one objection tothe house and that was the very powerful odor of dried fish ofmacerated meat and of sour milk which three fragrances combined didnot at all suit my olfactory nerves.As soon as we had freed ourselves from our heavy traveling costume thevoice of our host was heard calling to us to come into the kitchen theonly room in which the Icelanders ever make any fire no matter how coldit may be.My uncle nothing loath hastened to obey this hospitable and friendlyinvitation. I followed.The kitchen chimney was made on an antique model. A large stone standingin the middle of the room was the fireplace above in the roof was ahole for the smoke to pass through. This apartment was kitchen parlorand dining room all in one.On our entrance our worthy host as if he had not seen us beforeadvanced ceremoniously uttered a word which means be happy and thenkissed both of us on the cheek.His wife followed pronounced the same word with the same ceremonialthen the husband and wife placing their right hands upon their heartsbowed profoundly.This excellent Icelandic woman was the mother of nineteen children wholittle and big rolled crawled and walked about in the midst ofvolumes of smoke arising from the angular fireplace in the middle of theroom. Every now and then I could see a fresh white head and a slightlymelancholy expression of countenance peering at me through the vapor.Both my uncle and myself however were very friendly with the wholeparty and before we were aware of it there were three or four of theselittle ones on our shoulders as many on our boxes and the rest hangingabout our legs. Those who could speak kept crying out saellvertu inevery possible and impossible key. Those who did not speak only made allthe more noise.This concert was interrupted by the announcement of supper. At thismoment our worthy guide the eiderduck hunter came in after seeing tothe feeding and stabling of the horseswhich consisted in letting themloose to browse on the stunted green of the Icelandic prairies. Therewas little for them to eat but moss and some very dry and innutritiousgrass next day they were ready before the door some time before wewere.Welcome said Hans.Then tranquilly with the air of an automaton without any moreexpression in one kiss than another he embraced the host and hostessand their nineteen children.This ceremony concluded to the satisfaction of all parties we all satdown to table that is twentyfour of us somewhat crowded. Those whowere best off had only two juveniles on their knees.As soon however as the inevitable soup was placed on the table thenatural taciturnity common even to Icelandic babies prevailed over allelse. Our host filled our plates with a portion of lichen soup ofIceland moss of by no means disagreeable flavor an enormous lump offish floating in sour butter. After that there came some skyr a kind ofcurds and whey served with biscuits and juniperberry juice. To drinkwe had blanda skimmed milk with water. I was hungry so hungry that byway of dessert I finished up with a basin of thick oaten porridge.As soon as the meal was over the children disappeared whilst the grownpeople sat around the fireplace on which was placed turf heather cowdung and dried fishbones. As soon as everybody was sufficiently warm ageneral dispersion took place all retiring to their respective couches.Our hostess offered to pull off our stockings and trousers according tothe custom of the country but as we graciously declined to be sohonored she left us to our bed of dry fodder.Next day at five in the morning we took our leave of these hospitablepeasants. My uncle had great difficulty in making them accept asufficient and proper remuneration.Hans then gave the signal to start.We had scarcely got a hundred yards from Gardar when the character ofthe country changed. The soil began to be marshy and boggy and lessfavorable to progress. To the right the range of mountains wasprolonged indefinitely like a great system of natural fortifications ofwhich we skirted the glacis. We met with numerous streams and rivuletswhich it was necessary to ford and that without wetting our baggage. Aswe advanced the deserted appearance increased and yet now and then wecould see human shadows flitting in the distance. When a sudden turn ofthe track brought us within easy reach of one of these specters I felta sudden impulse of disgust at the sight of a swollen head with shiningskin utterly without hair and whose repulsive and revolting woundscould be seen through his rags. The unhappy wretches never came forwardto beg on the contrary they ran away not so quick however but thatHans was able to salute them with the universal saellvertu.Spetelsk said he.A leper explained my uncle.The very sound of such a word caused a feeling of repulsion. Thehorrible affliction known as leprosy which has almost vanished beforethe effects of modern science is common in Iceland. It is notcontagious but hereditary so that marriage is strictly prohibited tothese unfortunate creatures.These poor lepers did not tend to enliven our journey the scene ofwhich was inexpressibly sad and lonely. The very last tufts of grassyvegetation appeared to die at our feet. Not a tree was to be seenexcept a few stunted willows about as big as blackberry bushes. Now andthen we watched a falcon soaring in the grey and misty air taking hisflight towards warmer and sunnier regions. I could not help feeling asense of melancholy come over me. I sighed for my own Native Land andwished to be back with Gretchen.We were compelled to cross several little fjords and at last came to areal gulf. The tide was at its height and we were able to go over atonce and reach the hamlet of Alftanes about a mile farther.That evening after fording the Alfa and the Heta two rivers rich introut and pike we were compelled to pass the night in a deserted houseworthy of being haunted by all the fays of Scandinavian mythology. TheKing of Cold had taken up his residence there and made us feel hispresence all night.The following day was remarkable by its lack of any particularincidents. Always the same damp and swampy soil the same drearyuniformity the same sad and monotonous aspect of scenery. In theevening having accomplished the half of our projected journey we sleptat the Annexia of Krosolbt.For a whole mile we had under our feet nothing but lava. Thisdisposition of the soil is called ihrauni the crumbled lava on thesurface was in some instances like ship cables stretched outhorizontally in others coiled up in heaps an immense field of lavacame from the neighboring mountains all extinct volcanoes but whoseremains showed what once they had been. Here and there could be made outthe steam from hot water springs.There was no time however for us to take more than a cursory view ofthese phenomena. We had to go forward with what speed we might. Soon thesoft and swampy soil again appeared under the feet of our horses whileat every hundred yards we came upon one or more small lakes. Our journeywas now in a westerly direction we had in fact swept round the greatbay of Faxa and the twin white summits of Sneffels rose to the cloudsat a distance of less than five miles.The horses now advanced rapidly. The accidents and difficulties of thesoil no longer checked them. I confess that fatigue began to tellseverely upon me but my uncle was as firm and as hard as he had been onthe first day. I could not help admiring both the excellent Professorand the worthy guide for they appeared to regard this rugged expeditionas a mere walkOn Saturday the th June at six oclock in the evening we reachedBudir a small town picturesquely situated on the shore of the oceanand here the guide asked for his money. My uncle settled with himimmediately. It was now the family of Hans himself that is to say hisuncles his cousinsgerman who offered us hospitality. We wereexceedingly well received and without taking too much advantage of thegoodness of these worthy people I should have liked very much to haverested with them after the fatigues of the journey. But my uncle whodid not require rest had no idea of anything of the kind and despitethe fact that next day was Sunday I was compelled once more to mount mysteed.The soil was again affected by the neighborhood of the mountains whosegranite peered out of the ground like tops of an old oak. We wereskirting the enormous base of the mighty volcano. My uncle never tookhis eyes from off it he could not keep from gesticulating and lookingat it with a kind of sullen defiance as much as to say That is thegiant I have made up my mind to conquer.After four hours of steady traveling the horses stopped of themselvesbefore the door of the presbytery of Stapi.CHAPTER WE REACH MOUNT SNEFFELSTHE REYKIRStapi is a town consisting of thirty huts built on a large plain oflava exposed to the rays of the sun reflected from the volcano. Itstretches its humble tenements along the end of a little fjordsurrounded by a basaltic wall of the most singular character.Basalt is a brown rock of igneous origin. It assumes regular formswhich astonish by their singular appearance. Here we found Natureproceeding geometrically and working quite after a human fashion as ifshe had employed the plummet line the compass and the rule. Ifelsewhere she produces grand artistic effects by piling up huge masseswithout order or connectionif elsewhere we see truncated conesimperfect pyramids with an odd succession of lines here as if wishingto give a lesson in regularity and preceding the architects of theearly ages she has erected a severe order of architecture whichneither the splendors of Babylon nor the marvels of Greece eversurpassed.I had often heard of the Giants Causeway in Ireland and of FingalsCave in one of the Hebrides but the grand spectacle of a real basalticformation had never yet come before my eyes.This at Stapi gave us an idea of one in all its wonderful beauty andgrace.The wall of the fjord like nearly the whole of the peninsula consistedof a series of vertical columns in height about thirty feet. Theseupright pillars of stone of the finest proportions supported anarchivault of horizontal columns which formed a kind of halfvaultedroof above the sea. At certain intervals and below this natural basinthe eye was pleased and surprised by the sight of oval openings throughwhich the outward waves came thundering in volleys of foam. Some banksof basalt torn from their fastenings by the fury of the waves layscattered on the ground like the ruins of an ancient templeruinseternally young over which the storms of ages swept without producingany perceptible effectThis was the last stage of our journey. Hans had brought us along withfidelity and intelligence and I began to feel somewhat more comfortablewhen I reflected that he was to accompany us still farther on our way.When we halted before the house of the Rector a small and incommodiouscabin neither handsome nor more comfortable than those of hisneighbors I saw a man in the act of shoeing a horse a hammer in hishand and a leathern apron tied round his waist.Be happy said the eiderdown hunter using his national salutation inhis own language.God daggood day replied the former in excellent Danish.Kyrkoherde cried Hans turning round and introducing him to my uncle.The Rector repeated the worthy Professor it appears my dear Harrythat this worthy man is the Rector and is not above doing his ownwork.During the speaking of these words the guide intimated to the Kyrkoherdewhat was the true state of the case. The good man ceasing from hisoccupation gave a kind of halloo upon which a tall woman almost agiantess came out of the hut. She was at least six feet high which inthat region is something considerable.My first impression was one of horror. I thought she had come to give usthe Icelandic kiss. I had however nothing to fear for she did noteven show much inclination to receive us into her house.The room devoted to strangers appeared to me to be by far the worst inthe presbytery it was narrow dirty and offensive. There was howeverno choice about the matter. The Rector had no notion of practicing theusual cordial and antique hospitality. Far from it. Before the day wasover I found we had to deal with a blacksmith a fisherman a hunter acarpenter anything but a clergyman. It must be said in his favor thatwe had caught him on a weekday probably he appeared to greateradvantage on the Sunday.These poor priests receive from the Danish Government a mostridiculously inadequate salary and collect one quarter of the tithe oftheir parishnot more than sixty marks current or about L s.sterling. Hence the necessity of working to live. In truth we soonfound that our host did not count civility among the cardinal virtues.My uncle soon became aware of the kind of man he had to deal with.Instead of a worthy and learned scholar he found a dull illmanneredpeasant. He therefore resolved to start on his great expedition as soonas possible. He did not care about fatigue and resolved to spend a fewdays in the mountains.The preparations for our departure were made the very next day after ourarrival at Stapi Hans now hired three Icelanders to take the place ofthe horseswhich could no longer carry our luggage. When howeverthese worthy islanders had reached the bottom of the crater they wereto go back and leave us to ourselves. This point was settled before theywould agree to start.On this occasion my uncle partly confided in Hans the eiderduckhunter and gave him to understand that it was his intention to continuehis exploration of the volcano to the last possible limits.Hans listened calmly and then nodded his head. To go there orelsewhere to bury himself in the bowels of the earth or to travel overits summits was all the same to him As for me amused and occupied bythe incidents of travel I had begun to forget the inevitable futurebut now I was once more destined to realize the actual state of affairs.What was to be done Run away But if I really had intended to leaveProfessor Hardwigg to his fate it should have been at Hamburg and notat the foot of Sneffels.One idea above all others began to trouble me a very terrible ideaand one calculated to shake the nerves of a man even less sensitive thanmyself.Let us consider the matter I said to myself we are going to ascendthe Sneffels mountain. Well and good. We are about to pay a visit to thevery bottom of the crater. Good still. Others have done it and did notperish from that course.That however is not the whole matter to be considered. If a road doesreally present itself by which to descend into the dark andsubterraneous bowels of Mother Earth if this thrice unhappy Saknussemmhas really told the truth we shall be most certainly lost in the midstof the labyrinth of subterraneous galleries of the volcano. Now we haveno evidence to prove that Sneffels is really extinct. What proof have wethat an eruption is not shortly about to take place Because the monsterhas slept soundly since does it follow that he is never to wakeIf he does wake what is to become of usThese were questions worth thinking about and upon them I reflectedlong and deeply. I could not lie down in search of sleep withoutdreaming of eruptions. The more I thought the more I objected to bereduced to the state of dross and ashes.I could stand it no longer so I determined at last to submit the wholecase to my uncle in the most adroit manner possible and under the formof some totally irreconcilable hypothesis.I sought him. I laid before him my fears and then drew back in order tolet him get his passion over at his ease.I have been thinking about the matter he said in the quietest tonein the world.What did he mean Was he at last about to listen to the voice of reasonDid he think of suspending his projects It was almost too muchhappiness to be true.I however made no remark. In fact I was only too anxious not tointerrupt him and allowed him to reflect at his leisure. After somemoments he spoke out.I have been thinking about the matter he resumed. Ever since we havebeen at Stapi my mind has been almost solely occupied with the gravequestion which has been submitted to me by yourselffor nothing wouldbe unwiser and more inconsistent than to act with imprudence.I heartily agree with you my dear uncle was my somewhat hopefulrejoinder.It is now six hundred years since Sneffels has spoken but though nowreduced to a state of utter silence he may speak again. New volcaniceruptions are always preceded by perfectly wellknown phenomena. I haveclosely examined the inhabitants of this region I have carefullystudied the soil and I beg to tell you emphatically my dear Harrythere will be no eruption at present.As I listened to his positive affirmations I was stupefied and couldsay nothing.I see you doubt my word said my uncle follow me.I obeyed mechanically.Leaving the presbytery the Professor took a road through an opening inthe basaltic rock which led far away from the sea. We were soon in opencountry if we could give such a name to a place all covered withvolcanic deposits. The whole land seemed crushed under the weight ofenormous stonesof trap of basalt of granite of lava and of allother volcanic substances.I could see many spouts of steam rising in the air. These white vaporscalled in the Icelandic language reykir come from hot waterfountains and indicate by their violence the volcanic activity of thesoil. Now the sight of these appeared to justify my apprehension. I wastherefore all the more surprised and mortified when my uncle thusaddressed me.You see all this smoke Harry my boyYes sir.Well as long as you see them thus you have nothing to fear from thevolcano.How can that beBe careful to remember this continued the Professor. At the approachof an eruption these spouts of vapor redouble their activitytodisappear altogether during the period of volcanic eruption for theelastic fluids no longer having the necessary tension seek refuge inthe interior of the crater instead of escaping through the fissures ofthe earth. If then the steam remains in its normal or habitual stateif their energy does not increase and if you add to this the remarkthat the wind is not replaced by heavy atmospheric pressure and deadcalm you may be quite sure that there is no fear of any immediateeruption.ButEnough my boy. When science has sent forth her fiatit is only tohear and obey.I came back to the house quite downcast and disappointed. My uncle hadcompletely defeated me with his scientific arguments. Nevertheless Ihad still one hope and that was when once we were at the bottom of thecrater that it would be impossible in default of a gallery or tunnelto descend any deeper and this despite all the learned Saknussemms inthe world.I passed the whole of the following night with a nightmare on my chestand after unheardof miseries and tortures found myself in the verydepths of the earth from which I was suddenly launched into planetaryspace under the form of an eruptive rockNext day June d Hans calmly awaited us outside the presbytery withhis three companions loaded with provisions tools and instruments. Twoironshod poles two guns and two large game bags were reserved for myuncle and myself. Hans who was a man who never forgot even the minutestprecautions had added to our baggage a large skin full of water as anaddition to our gourds. This assured us water for eight days.It was nine oclock in the morning when we were quite ready. The rectorand his huge wife or servant I never knew which stood at the door tosee us off. They appeared to be about to inflict on us the usual finalkiss of the Icelanders. To our supreme astonishment their adieu took theshape of a formidable bill in which they even counted the use of thepastoral house really and truly the most abominable and dirty place Iever was in. The worthy couple cheated and robbed us like a Swissinnkeeper and made us feel by the sum we had to pay the splendors oftheir hospitality.My uncle however paid without bargaining. A man who had made up hismind to undertake a voyage into the Interior of the Earth is not theman to haggle over a few miserable rixdollars.This important matter settled Hans gave the signal for departure andsome few moments later we had left Stapi.CHAPTER THE ASCENT OF MOUNT SNEFFELSThe huge volcano which was the first stage of our daring experiment isabove five thousand feet high. Sneffels is the termination of a longrange of volcanic mountains of a different character to the system ofthe island itself. One of its peculiarities is its two huge pointedsummits. From whence we started it was impossible to make out the realoutlines of the peak against the grey field of sky. All we coulddistinguish was a vast dome of white which fell downwards from the headof the giant.The commencement of the great undertaking filled me with awe. Now thatwe had actually started I began to believe in the reality of theundertakingOur party formed quite a procession. We walked in single file precededby Hans the imperturbable eiderduck hunter. He calmly led us by narrowpaths where two persons could by no possibility walk abreast.Conversation was wholly impossible. We had all the more opportunity toreflect and admire the awful grandeur of the scene around.Beyond the extraordinary basaltic wall of the fjord of Stapi we foundourselves making our way through fibrous turf over which grew a scantyvegetation of grass the residuum of the ancient vegetation of theswampy peninsula. The vast mass of this combustible the field of whichas yet is utterly unexplored would suffice to warm Iceland for a wholecentury. This mighty turf pit measured from the bottom of certainravines is often not less than seventy feet deep and presents to theeye the view of successive layers of black burnedup rocky detritusseparated by thin streaks of porous sandstone.The grandeur of the spectacle was undoubted as well as its arid anddeserted air.As a true nephew of the great Professor Hardwigg and despite mypreoccupation and doleful fears of what was to come I observed withgreat interest the vast collection of mineralogical curiosities spreadout before me in this vast museum of natural history. Looking back to myrecent studies I went over in thought the whole geological history ofIceland.This extraordinary and curious island must have made its appearance fromout of the great world of waters at a comparatively recent date. Likethe coral islands of the Pacific it may for aught we know be stillrising by slow and imperceptible degrees.If this really be the case its origin can be attributed to only onecausethat of the continued action of subterranean fires.This was a happy thought.If so if this were true away with the theories of Sir Humphry Davyaway with the authority of the parchment of Arne Saknussemm thewonderful pretensions to discovery on the part of my uncleand to ourjourneyAll must end in smoke.Charmed with the idea I began more carefully to look about me. Aserious study of the soil was necessary to negative or confirm myhypothesis. I took in every item of what I saw and I began tocomprehend the succession of phenomena which had preceded its formation.Iceland being absolutely without sedimentary soil is composedexclusively of volcanic tufa that is to say of an agglomeration ofstones and of rocks of a porous texture. Long before the existence ofvolcanoes it was composed of a solid body of massive trap rock liftedbodily and slowly out of the sea by the action of the centrifugal forceat work in the earth.The internal fires however had not as yet burst their bounds andflooded the exterior cake of Mother Earth with hot and raging lava.My readers must excuse this brief and somewhat pedantic geologicallecture. But it is necessary to the complete understanding of whatfollows.At a later period in the worlds history a huge and mighty fissuremust reasoning by analogy have been dug diagonally from the southwestto the northeast of the island through which by degrees flowed thevolcanic crust. The great and wondrous phenomenon then went on withoutviolencethe outpouring was enormous and the seething fused matterejected from the bowels of the earth spread slowly and peacefully inthe form of vast level plains or what are called mamelons or mounds.It was at this epoch that the rocks called feldspars syenites andporphyries appeared.But as a natural consequence of this overflow the depth of the islandincreased. It can readily be believed what an enormous quantity ofelastic fluids were piled up within its centre when at last it affordedno other openings after the process of cooling the crust had takenplace.At length a time came when despite the enormous thickness and weight ofthe upper crust the mechanical forces of the combustible gases belowbecame so great that they actually upheaved the weighty back and madefor themselves huge and gigantic shafts. Hence the volcanoes whichsuddenly arose through the upper crust and next the craters whichburst forth at the summit of these new creations.It will be seen that the first phenomena in connection with theformation of the island were simply eruptive to these however shortlysucceeded the volcanic phenomena.Through the newly formed openings escaped the marvelous mass ofbasaltic stones with which the plain we were now crossing was covered.We were trampling our way over heavy rocks of dark grey color whichwhile cooling had been moulded into sixsided prisms. In the backdistance we could see a number of flattened cones which formerly wereso many firevomiting mouths.After the basaltic eruption was appeased and set at rest the volcanothe force of which increased with that of the extinct craters gave freepassage to the fiery overflow of lava and to the mass of cinders andpumice stone now scattered over the sides of the mountain likedisheveled hair on the shoulders of a Bacchante.Here in a nutshell I had the whole history of the phenomena from whichIceland arose. All take their rise in the fierce action of interiorfires and to believe that the central mass did not remain in a state ofliquid fire white hot was simply and purely madness.This being satisfactorily proved Q.E.D. what insensate folly topretend to penetrate into the interior of the mighty earthThis mental lecture delivered to myself while proceeding on a journeydid me good. I was quite reassured as to the fate of our enterprise andtherefore went like a brave soldier mounting a bristling battery tothe assault of old Sneffels.As we advanced the road became every moment more difficult. The soilwas broken and dangerous. The rocks broke and gave way under our feetand we had to be scrupulously careful in order to avoid dangerous andconstant falls.Hans advanced as calmly as if he had been walking over Salisbury Plainsometimes he would disappear behind huge blocks of stone and wemomentarily lost sight of him. There was a little period of anxiety andthen there was a shrill whistle just to tell us where to look for him.Occasionally he would take it into his head to stop to pick up lumps ofrock and silently pile them up into small heaps in order that we mightnot lose our way on our return.He had no idea of the journey we were about to undertake.At all events the precaution was a good one though how utterly uselessand unnecessarybut I must not anticipate.Three hours of terrible fatigue walking incessantly had only broughtus to the foot of the great mountain. This will give some notion of whatwe had still to undergo.Suddenly however Hans cried a haltthat is he made signs to thateffectand a summary kind of breakfast was laid out on the lava beforeus. My uncle who now was simply Professor Hardwigg was so eager toadvance that he bolted his food like a greedy clown. This halt forrefreshment was also a halt for repose. The Professor was thereforecompelled to wait the good pleasure of his imperturbable guide who didnot give the signal for departure for a good hour.The three Icelanders who were as taciturn as their comrade did not saya word but went on eating and drinking very quietly and soberly.From this our first real stage we began to ascend the slopes of theSneffels volcano. Its magnificent snowy nightcap as we began to callit by an optical delusion very common in mountains appeared to me tobe close at hand and yet how many long weary hours must elapse beforewe reached its summit. What unheardof fatigue must we endureThe stones on the mountain side held together by no cement of soilbound together by no roots or creeping herbs gave way continually underour feet and went rushing below into the plains like a series of smallavalanches.In certain places the sides of this stupendous mountain were at an angleso steep that it was impossible to climb upwards and we were compelledto get round these obstacles as best we might.Those who understand Alpine climbing will comprehend our difficulties.Often we were obliged to help each other along by means of our climbingpoles.I must say this for my uncle that he stuck as close to me as possible.He never lost sight of me and on many occasions his arm supplied mewith firm and solid support. He was strong wiry and apparentlyinsensible to fatigue. Another great advantage with him was that he hadthe innate sentiment of equilibriumfor he never slipped or failed inhis steps. The Icelanders though heavily loaded climbed with theagility of mountaineers.Looking up every now and then at the height of the great volcano ofSneffels it appeared to me wholly impossible to reach to the summit onthat side at all events if the angle of inclination did not speedilychange.Fortunately after an hour of unheardof fatigues and of gymnasticexercises that would have been trying to an acrobat we came to a vastfield of ice which wholly surrounded the bottom of the cone of thevolcano. The natives called it the tablecloth probably from some suchreason as the dwellers in the Cape of Good Hope call their mountainTable Mountain and their roads Table Bay.Here to our mutual surprise we found an actual flight of stone stepswhich wonderfully assisted our ascent. This singular flight of stairswas like everything else volcanic. It had been formed by one of thosetorrents of stones cast up by the eruptions and of which the Icelandicname is stina. If this singular torrent had not been checked in itsdescent by the peculiar shape of the flanks of the mountain it wouldhave swept into the sea and would have formed new islands.Such as it was it served us admirably. The abrupt character of theslopes momentarily increased but these remarkable stone steps a littleless difficult than those of the Egyptian pyramids were the one simplenatural means by which we were enabled to proceed.About seven in the evening of that day after having clambered up twothousand of these rough steps we found ourselves overlooking a kind ofspur or projection of the mountaina sort of buttress upon which theconelike crater properly so called leaned for support.The ocean lay beneath us at a depth of more than three thousand twohundred feeta grand and mighty spectacle. We had reached the region ofeternal snows.The cold was keen searching and intense. The wind blew withextraordinary violence. I was utterly exhausted.My worthy uncle the Professor saw clearly that my legs refused furtherservice and that in fact I was utterly exhausted. Despite his hot andfeverish impatience he decided with a sigh upon a halt. He called theeiderduck hunter to his side. That worthy however shook his head.Ofvanfor was his sole spoken reply.It appears says my uncle with a woebegone look that we must gohigher.He then turned to Hans and asked him to give some reason for thisdecisive response.Mistour replied the guide.Ja mistouryes the mistour cried one of the Icelandic guides in aterrified tone.It was the first time he had spoken.What does this mysterious word signify I anxiously inquired.Look said my uncle.I looked down upon the plain below and I saw a vast a prodigiousvolume of pulverized pumice stone of sand of dust rising to theheavens in the form of a mighty waterspout. It resembled the fearfulphenomenon of a similar character known to the travelers in the desertof the great Sahara.The wind was driving it directly towards that side of Sneffels on whichwe were perched. This opaque veil standing up between us and the sunprojected a deep shadow on the flanks of the mountain. If this sandspout broke over us we must all be infallibly destroyed crushed in itsfearful embraces. This extraordinary phenomenon very common when thewind shakes the glaciers and sweeps over the arid plains is in theIcelandic tongue called mistour.Hastigt hastigt cried our guide.Now I certainly knew nothing of Danish but I thoroughly understood thathis gestures were meant to quicken us.The guide turned rapidly in a direction which would take us to the backof the crater all the while ascending slightly.We followed rapidly despite our excessive fatigue.A quarter of an hour later Hans paused to enable us to look back. Themighty whirlwind of sand was spreading up the slope of the mountain tothe very spot where we had proposed to halt. Huge stones were caught upcast into the air and thrown about as during an eruption. We werehappily a little out of the direction of the wind and therefore out ofreach of danger. But for the precaution and knowledge of our guide ourdislocated bodies our crushed and broken limbs would have been cast tothe wind like dust from some unknown meteor.Hans however did not think it prudent to pass the night on the bareside of the cone. We therefore continued our journey in a zigzagdirection. The fifteen hundred feet which remained to be accomplishedtook us at least five hours. The turnings and windings thenothoroughfares the marches and marches turned that insignificantdistance into at least three leagues. I never felt such misery fatigueand exhaustion in my life. I was ready to faint from hunger and cold.The rarefied air at the same time painfully acted upon my lungs.At last when I thought myself at my last gasp about eleven at nightit being in that region quite dark we reached the summit of MountSneffels It was in an awful mood of mind that despite my fatiguebefore I descended into the crater which was to shelter us for thenight I paused to behold the sun rise at midnight on the very day ofits lowest declension and enjoyed the spectacle of its ghastly palerays cast upon the isle which lay sleeping at our feetI no longer wondered at people traveling all the way from England toNorway to behold this magical and wondrous spectacle.CHAPTER THE SHADOW OF SCARTARISOur supper was eaten with ease and rapidity after which everybody didthe best he could for himself within the hollow of the crater. The bedwas hard the shelter unsatisfactory the situation painfullying inthe open air five thousand feet above the level of the seaNevertheless it has seldom happened to me to sleep so well as I did onthat particular night. I did not even dream. So much for the effects ofwhat my uncle called wholesome fatigue.Next day when we awoke under the rays of a bright and glorious sun wewere nearly frozen by the keen air. I left my granite couch and made oneof the party to enjoy a view of the magnificent spectacle whichdeveloped itself panoramalike at our feet.I stood upon the lofty summit of Mount Sneffels southern peak. Thence Iwas able to obtain a view of the greater part of the island. The opticaldelusion common to all lofty heights raised the shores of the islandwhile the central portions appeared depressed. It was by no means toogreat a flight of fancy to believe that a giant picture was stretchedout before me. I could see the deep valleys that crossed each other inevery direction. I could see precipices looking like sides of wellslakes that seemed to be changed into ponds ponds that looked likepuddles and rivers that were transformed into petty brooks. To my rightwere glaciers upon glaciers and multiplied peaks topped with lightclouds of smoke.The undulation of these infinite numbers of mountains whose snowysummits make them look as if covered by foam recalled to my remembrancethe surface of a stormbeaten ocean. If I looked towards the west theocean lay before me in all its majestic grandeur a continuation as itwere of these fleecy hilltops.Where the earth ended and the sea began it was impossible for the eye todistinguish.I soon felt that strange and mysterious sensation which is awakened inthe mind when looking down from lofty hilltops and now I was able to doso without any feeling of nervousness having fortunately hardenedmyself to that kind of sublime contemplation.I wholly forgot who I was and where I was. I became intoxicated with asense of lofty sublimity without thought of the abysses into which mydaring was soon about to plunge me. I was presently however broughtback to the realities of life by the arrival of the Professor and Hanswho joined me upon the lofty summit of the peak.My uncle turning in a westerly direction pointed out to me a lightcloud of vapor a kind of haze with a faint outline of land rising outof the waters.Greenland said he.Greenland cried I in reply.Yes continued my uncle who always when explaining anything spoke asif he were in a professors chair we are not more than thirtyfiveleagues distant from that wonderful land. When the great annual breakupof the ice takes place white bears come over to Iceland carried by thefloating masses of ice from the north. This however is a matter oflittle consequence. We are now on the summit of the great thetranscendent Sneffels and here are its two peaks north and south. Hanswill tell you the name by which the people of Iceland call that on whichwe stand.My uncle turned to the imperturbable guide who nodded and spoke asusualone word.Scartaris.My uncle looked at me with a proud and triumphant glance.A crater he said you hearI did hear but I was totally unable to make reply.The crater of Mount Sneffels represented an inverted cone the gapingorifice apparently half a mile across the depth indefinite feet.Conceive what this hole must have been like when full of flame andthunder and lightning. The bottom of the funnelshaped hollow was aboutfive hundred feet in circumference by which it will be seen that theslope from the summit to the bottom was very gradual and we weretherefore clearly able to get there without much fatigue or difficulty.Involuntarily I compared this crater to an enormous loaded cannon andthe comparison completely terrified me.To descend into the interior of a cannon I thought to myself whenperhaps it is loaded and will go off at the least shock is the act ofa madman.But there was no longer any opportunity for me to hesitate. Hans with aperfectly calm and indifferent air took his usual post at the head ofthe adventurous little band. I followed without uttering a syllable.I felt like the lamb led to the slaughter.In order to render the descent less difficult Hans took his way downthe interior of the cone in rather a zigzag fashion making as thesailors say long tracks to the eastward followed by equally long onesto the west. It was necessary to walk through the midst of eruptiverocks some of which shaken in their balance went rolling down withthundering clamor to the bottom of the abyss. These continual fallsawoke echoes of singular power and effect.Many portions of the cone consisted of inferior glaciers. Hans wheneverhe met with one of these obstacles advanced with a great show ofprecaution sounding the soil with his long iron pole in order todiscover fissures and layers of deep soft snow. In many doubtful ordangerous places it became necessary for us to be tied together by along rope in order that should any one of us be unfortunate enough toslip he would be supported by his companions. This connecting link wasdoubtless a prudent precaution but not by any means unattended withdanger.Nevertheless and despite all the manifold difficulties of the descentalong slopes with which our guide was wholly unacquainted we madeconsiderable progress without accident. One of our great parcels of ropeslipped from one of the Iceland porters and rushed by a short cut tothe bottom of the abyss.By midday we were at the end of our journey. I looked upwards and sawonly the upper orifice of the cone which served as a circular frame toa very small portion of the skya portion which seemed to me singularlybeautiful. Should I ever again gaze on that lovely sunlit skyThe only exception to this extraordinary landscape was the Peak ofScartaris which seemed lost in the great void of the heavens.The bottom of the crater was composed of three separate shafts throughwhich during periods of eruption when Sneffels was in action thegreat central furnace sent forth its burning lava and poisonous vapors.Each of these chimneys or shafts gaped openmouthed in our path. I keptas far away from them as possible not even venturing to take thefaintest peep downwards.As for the Professor after a rapid examination of their disposition andcharacteristics he became breathless and panting. He ran from one tothe other like a delighted schoolboy gesticulating wildly and utteringincomprehensible and disjointed phrases in all sorts of languages.Hans the guide and his humbler companions seated themselves on somepiles of lava and looked silently on. They clearly took my uncle for alunatic andwaited the result.Suddenly the Professor uttered a wild unearthly cry. At first Iimagined he had lost his footing and was falling headlong into one ofthe yawning gulfs. Nothing of the kind. I saw him his arms spread outto their widest extent his legs stretched apart standing uprightbefore an enormous pedestal high enough and black enough to bear agigantic statue of Pluto. His attitude and mien were that of a manutterly stupefied. But his stupefaction was speedily changed to thewildest joy.Harry Harry come here he cried make hastewonderfulwonderfulUnable to understand what he meant I turned to obey his commands.Neither Hans nor the other Icelanders moved a step.Look said the Professor in something of the manner of the Frenchgeneral pointing out the pyramids to his army.And fully partaking his stupefaction if not his joy I read on theeastern side of the huge block of stone the same characters half eatenaway by the corrosive action of time the name to me a thousand timesaccursedIllustration Runic GlyphsArne Saknussemm cried my uncle now unbeliever do you begin tohave faithIt was totally impossible for me to answer a single word. I went back tomy pile of lava in a state of silent awe. The evidence wasunanswerable overwhelmingIn a few moments however my thoughts were far away back in my Germanhome with Gretchen and the old cook. What would I have given for one ofmy cousins smiles for one of the ancient domestics omelettes and formy own feather bedHow long I remained in this state I know not. All I can say is thatwhen at last I raised my head from between my hands there remained atthe bottom of the crater only myself my uncle and Hans. The Icelandicporters had been dismissed and were now descending the exterior slopesof Mount Sneffels on their way to Stapi. How heartily did I wish myselfwith themHans slept tranquilly at the foot of a rock in a kind of rill of lavawhere he had made himself a rough and ready bed. MY uncle was walkingabout the bottom of the crater like a wild beast in a cage. I had nodesire neither had I the strength to move from my recumbent position.Taking example by the guide I gave way to a kind of painful somnolencyduring which I seemed both to hear and feel continued heavings andshudderings in the mountain.In this way we passed our first night in the interior of a crater.Next morning a grey cloudy heavy sky hung like a funereal pall overthe summit of the volcanic cone. I did not notice it so much from theobscurity that reigned around us as from the rage with which my unclewas devoured.I fully understood the reason and again a glimpse of hope made my heartleap with joy. I will briefly explain the cause.Of the three openings which yawned beneath our steps only one couldhave been followed by the adventurous Saknussemm. According to the wordsof the learned Icelander it was only to be known by that one particularmentioned in the cryptograph that the shadow of Scartaris fell upon itjust touching its mouth in the last days of the month of June.We were in fact to consider the pointed peak as the stylus of animmense sundial the shadow of which pointed on one given day like theinexorable finger of fate to the yawning chasm which led into theinterior of the earth.Now as often happens in these regions should the sun fail to burstthrough the clouds no shadow. Consequently no chance of discoveringthe right aperture. We had already reached the th June. If the kindlyheavens would only remain densely clouded for six more days we shouldhave to put off our voyage of discovery for another year when certainlythere would be one person fewer in the party. I already had sufficientof the mad and monstrous enterprise.It would be utterly impossible to depict the impotent rage of ProfessorHardwigg. The day passed away and not the faintest outline of a shadowcould be seen at the bottom of the crater. Hans the guide never movedfrom his place. He must have been curious to know what we were about ifindeed he could believe we were about anything. As for my uncle henever addressed a word to me. He was nursing his wrath to keep it warmHis eyes fixed on the black and foggy atmosphere his complexion hideouswith suppressed passion. Never had his eyes appeared so fierce his noseso aquiline his mouth so hard and firm.On the th no change for the better. A mixture of rain and snow fellduring the whole day. Hans very quietly built himself a hut of lava intowhich he retired like Diogenes into his tub. I took a malicious delightin watching the thousand little cascades that flowed down the side ofthe cone carrying with them at times a stream of stones into the vastydeep below.My uncle was almost frantic to be sure it was enough to make even apatient man angry. He had reached to a certain extent the goal of hisdesires and yet he was likely to be wrecked in port.But if the heavens and the elements are capable of causing us much painand sorrow there are two sides to a medal. And there was reserved forProfessor Hardwigg a brilliant and sudden surprise which was tocompensate him for all his sufferings.Next day the sky was still overcast but on Sunday the th the lastday but two of the month with a sudden change of wind and a new moonthere came a change of weather. The sun poured its beaming rays to thevery bottom of the crater.Each hillock every rock every stone every asperity of the soil hadits share of the luminous effulgence and its shadow fell heavily on thesoil. Among others to his insane delight the shadow of Scartaris wasmarked and clear and moved slowly with the radiant start of day.My uncle moved with it in a state of mental ecstasy.At twelve oclock exactly when the sun had attained its highestaltitude for the day the shadow fell upon the edge of the central pitHere it is gasped the Professor in an agony of joy here it iswehave found it. Forward my friends into the Interior of the Earth.I looked curiously at Hans to see what reply he would make to thisterrific announcement.Forut said the guide tranquilly.Forward it is answered my uncle who was now in the seventh heaven ofdelight.When we were quite ready our watches indicated thirteen minutes pastoneCHAPTER THE REAL JOURNEY COMMENCESOur real journey had now commenced. Hitherto our courage anddetermination had overcome all difficulties. We were fatigued at timesand that was all. Now we were about to encounter unknown and fearfuldangers.I had not as yet ventured to take a glimpse down the horrible abyss intowhich in a few minutes more I was about to plunge. The fatal moment hadhowever at last arrived. I had still the option of refusing oraccepting a share in this foolish and audacious enterprise. But I wasashamed to show more fear than the eiderduck hunter. Hans seemed toaccept the difficulties of the journey so tranquilly with such calmindifference with such perfect recklessness of all danger that Iactually blushed to appear less of a man than heHad I been alone with my uncle I should certainly have sat down andargued the point fully but in the presence of the guide I held mytongue. I gave one moment to the thought of my charming cousin and thenI advanced to the mouth of the central shaft.It measured about a hundred feet in diameter which made about threehundred in circumference. I leaned over a rock which stood on its edgeand looked down. My hair stood on end my teeth chattered my limbstrembled. I seemed utterly to lose my centre of gravity while my headwas in a sort of whirl like that of a drunken man. There is nothingmore powerful than this attraction towards an abyss. I was about to fallheadlong into the gaping well when I was drawn back by a firm andpowerful hand. It was that of Hans. I had not taken lessons enough atthe FrelsersKirk of Copenhagen in the art of looking down from loftyeminences without blinkingHowever few as the minutes were during which I gazed down thistremendous and even wondrous shaft I had a sufficient glimpse of it togive me some idea of its physical conformation. Its sides which werealmost as perpendicular as those of a well presented numerousprojections which doubtless would assist our descent.It was a sort of wild and savage staircase without bannister or fence.A rope fastened above near the surface would certainly support ourweight and enable us to reach the bottom but how when we had arrivedat its utmost depth were we to loosen it above This was I thought aquestion of some importance.My uncle however was one of those men who are nearly always preparedwith expedients. He hit upon a very simple method of obviating thisdifficulty. He unrolled a cord about as thick as my thumb and at leastfour hundred feet in length. He allowed about half of it to go down thepit and catch in a hitch over a great block of lava which stood on theedge of the precipice. This done he threw the second half after thefirst.Each of us could now descend by catching the two cords in one hand. Whenabout two hundred feet below all the explorer had to do was to let goone end and pull away at the other when the cord would come falling athis feet. In order to go down farther all that was necessary was tocontinue the same operation.This was a very excellent proposition and no doubt a correct one.Going down appeared to me easy enough it was the coming up again thatnow occupied my thoughts.Now said my uncle as soon as he had completed this importantpreparation let us see about the baggage. It must be divided intothree separate parcels and each of us must carry one on his back. Iallude to the more important and fragile articles.My worthy and ingenious uncle did not appear to consider that we cameunder the denomination.Hans he continued you will take charge of the tools and some of theprovisions you Harry must take possession of another third of theprovisions and of the arms. I will load myself with the rest of theeatables and with the more delicate instruments.But I exclaimed our clothes this mass of cord and ladderswhowill undertake to carry them downThey will go down of themselves.And how so I asked.You shall see.My uncle was not fond of half measures nor did he like anything in theway of hesitation. Giving his orders to Hans he had the whole of thenonfragile articles made up into one bundle and the packet firmly andsolidly fastened was simply pitched over the edge of the gulf.I heard the moaning of the suddenly displaced air and the noise offalling stones. My uncle leaning over the abyss followed the descent ofhis luggage with a perfectly selfsatisfied air and did not rise untilit had completely disappeared from sight.Now then he cried it is our turn.I put it in good faith to any man of common sensewas it possible tohear this energetic cry without a shudderThe Professor fastened his case of instruments on his back. Hans tookcharge of the tools I of the arms. The descent then commenced in thefollowing order Hans went first my uncle followed and I went last.Our progress was made in profound silencea silence only troubled bythe fall of pieces of rock which breaking from the jagged sides fellwith a roar into the depths below.I allowed myself to slide so to speak holding frantically on thedouble cord with one hand and with the other keeping myself off therocks by the assistance of my ironshod pole. One idea was all the timeimpressed upon my brain. I feared that the upper support would fail me.The cord appeared to me far too fragile to bear the weight of three suchpersons as we were with our luggage. I made as little use of it aspossible trusting to my own agility and doing miracles in the way offeats of dexterity and strength upon the projecting shelves and spurs oflava which my feet seemed to clutch as strongly as my hands.The guide went first I have said and when one of the slippery andfrail supports broke from under his feet he had recourse to his usualmonosyllabic way of speaking.Gif aktAttentionlook out repeated my uncle.In about half an hour we reached a kind of small terrace formed by afragment of rock projecting some distance from the sides of the shaft.Hans now began to haul upon the cord on one side only the other goingas quietly upward as the other came down. It fell at last bringing withit a shower of small stones lava and dust a disagreeable kind of rainor hail.While we were seated on this extraordinary bench I ventured once more tolook downwards. With a sigh I discovered that the bottom was stillwholly invisible. Were we then going direct to the interior of theearthThe performance with the cord recommenced and a quarter of an hourlater we had reached to the depth of another two hundred feet.I have very strong doubts if the most determined geologist would duringthat descent have studied the nature of the different layers of eartharound him. I did not trouble my head much about the matter whether wewere among the combustible carbon Silurians or primitive soil Ineither knew nor cared to know.Not so the inveterate Professor. He must have taken notes all the waydown for at one of our halts he began a brief lecture.The farther we advance said he the greater is my confidence in theresult. The disposition of these volcanic strata absolutely confirms thetheories of Sir Humphry Davy. We are still within the region of theprimordial soil the soil in which took place the chemical operation ofmetals becoming inflamed by coming in contact with the air and water. Iat once regret the old and now forever exploded theory of a centralfire. At all events we shall soon know the truth.Such was the everlasting conclusion to which he came. I however wasvery far from being in humor to discuss the matter. I had something elseto think of. My silence was taken for consent and still we continued togo down.At the expiration of three hours we were to all appearance as far offas ever from the bottom of the well. When I looked upwards however Icould see that the upper orifice was every minute decreasing in size.The sides of the shaft were getting closer and closer together we wereapproaching the regions of eternal nightAnd still we continued to descendAt length I noticed that when pieces of stone were detached from thesides of this stupendous precipice they were swallowed up with lessnoise than before. The final sound was sooner heard. We were approachingthe bottom of the abyssAs I had been very careful to keep account of all the changes of cordwhich took place I was able to tell exactly what was the depth we hadreached as well as the time it had taken.We had shifted the rope twentyeight times each operation taking aquarter of an hour which in all made seven hours. To this had to beadded twentyeight pauses in all ten hours and a half. We started atone it was now therefore about eleven oclock at night.It does not require great knowledge of arithmetic to know thattwentyeight times two hundred feet makes five thousand six hundred feetin all more than an English mile.While I was making this mental calculation a voice broke the silence. Itwas the voice of Hans.Halt he cried.I checked myself very suddenly just at the moment when I was about tokick my uncle on the head.We have reached the end of our journey said the worthy Professor in asatisfied tone.What the interior of the earth said I slipping down to his side.No you stupid fellow but we have reached the bottom of the well.And I suppose there is no farther progress to be made I hopefullyexclaimed.Oh yes I can dimly see a sort of tunnel which turns off obliquely tothe right. At all events we must see about that tomorrow. Let us supnow and seek slumber as best we may.I thought it time but made no observations on that point. I was fairlylaunched on a desperate course and all I had to do was to go forwardhopefully and trustingly.It was not even now quite dark the light filtering down in a mostextraordinary manner.We opened the provision bag ate a frugal supper and each did his bestto find a bed amid the pile of stones dirt and lava which hadaccumulated for ages at the bottom of the shaft.I happened to grope out the pile of ropes ladders and clothes which wehad thrown down and upon them I stretched myself. After such a dayslabor my rough bed seemed as soft as downFor a while I lay in a sort of pleasant trance.Presently after lying quietly for some minutes I opened my eyes andlooked upwards. As I did so I made out a brilliant little dot at theextremity of this long gigantic telescope.It was a star without scintillating rays. According to my calculationit must be Beta in the constellation of the Little Bear.After this little bit of astronomical recreation I dropped into a soundsleep.CHAPTER WE CONTINUE OUR DESCENTAt eight oclock the next morning a faint kind of dawn of day awoke us.The thousand and one prisms of the lava collected the light as it passedand brought it to us like a shower of sparks.We were able with ease to see objects around us.Well Harry my boy cried the delighted Professor rubbing his handstogether what say you now Did you ever pass a more tranquil night inour house in the Konigstrasse No deafening sounds of cart wheels nocries of hawkers no bad language from boatmen or watermenWell Uncle we are quite at the bottom of this wellbut to me thereis something terrible in this calm.Why said the Professor hotly one would say you were alreadybeginning to be afraid. How will you get on presently Do you know thatas yet we have not penetrated one inch into the bowels of the earth.What can you mean sir was my bewildered and astonished reply.I mean to say that we have only just reached the soil of the islanditself. This long vertical tube which ends at the bottom of the craterof Sneffels ceases here just about on a level with the sea.Are you sure sirQuite sure. Consult the barometer.It was quite true that the mercury after rising gradually in theinstrument as long as our descent was taking place had stoppedprecisely at twentynine degrees.You perceive said the Professor we have as yet only to endure thepressure of air. I am curious to replace the barometer by themanometer.The barometer in fact was about to become uselessas soon as theweight of the air was greater than what was calculated as above thelevel of the ocean.But said I is it not very much to be feared that thiseverincreasing pressure may not in the end turn out very painful andinconvenientNo said he. We shall descend very slowly and our lungs will begradually accustomed to breathe compressed air. It is well known thataeronauts have gone so high as to be nearly without air at allwhythen should we not accustom ourselves to breathe when we have say alittle too much of it For myself I am certain I shall prefer it. Letus not lose a moment. Where is the packet which preceded us in ourdescentI smilingly pointed it out to my uncle. Hans had not seen it andbelieved it caught somewhere above us Huppe as he phrased it.Now said my uncle let us breakfast and break fast like people whohave a long days work before them.Biscuit and dried meat washed down by some mouthfuls of water flavoredwith Schiedam was the material of our luxurious meal.As soon as it was finished my uncle took from his pocket a notebookdestined to be filled by memoranda of our travels. He had already placedhis instruments in order and this is what he wrote Monday June th Chronometer h. m. morning. Barometer . inches. Thermometer degrees degrees Fahr. Direction E.S.E.This last observation referred to the obscure gallery and was indicatedto us by the compass.Now Harry cried the Professor in an enthusiastic tone of voice weare truly about to take our first step into the Interior of the Earthnever before visited by man since the first creation of the world. Youmay consider therefore that at this precise moment our travels reallycommence.As my uncle made this remark he took in one hand the Ruhmkorff coilapparatus which hung round his neck and with the other he put theelectric current into communication with the worm of the lantern. And abright light at once illumined that dark and gloomy tunnelThe effect was magicalHans who carried the second apparatus had it also put into operation.This ingenious application of electricity to practical purposes enabledus to move along by the light of an artificial day amid even the flowof the most inflammable and combustible gases.Forward cried my uncle. Each took up his burden. Hans went first myuncle followed and I going third we entered the somber galleryJust as we were about to engulf ourselves in this dismal passage Ilifted up my head and through the tubelike shaft saw that Iceland sky Iwas never to see againWas it the last I should ever see of any skyThe stream of lava flowing from the bowels of the earth in hadforced itself a passage through the tunnel. It lined the whole of theinside with its thick and brilliant coating. The electric light addedvery greatly to the brilliancy of the effect.The great difficulty of our journey now began. How were we to preventourselves from slipping down the steeply inclined plane Happily somecracks abrasures of the soil and other irregularities served theplace of steps and we descended slowly allowing our heavy luggage toslip on before at the end of a long cord.But that which served as steps under our feet became in other placesstalactites. The lava very porous in certain places took the form oflittle round blisters. Crystals of opaque quartz adorned with limpiddrops of natural glass suspended to the roof like lusters seemed totake fire as we passed beneath them. One would have fancied that thegenii of romance were illuminating their underground palaces to receivethe sons of men.Magnificent glorious I cried in a moment of involuntary enthusiasmWhat a spectacle Uncle Do you not admire these variegated shades oflava which run through a whole series of colors from reddish brown topale yellowby the most insensible degrees And these crystals theyappear like luminous globes.You are beginning to see the charms of travel Master Harry cried myuncle. Wait a bit until we advance farther. What we have as yetdiscovered is nothingonwards my boy onwardsIt would have been a far more correct and appropriate expression had hesaid let us slide for we were going down an inclined plane withperfect ease. The compass indicated that we were moving in asoutheasterly direction. The flow of lava had never turned to the rightor the left. It had the inflexibility of a straight line.Nevertheless to my surprise we found no perceptible increase in heat.This proved the theories of Humphry Davy to be founded on truth andmore than once I found myself examining the thermometer in silentastonishment.Two hours after our departure it only marked fiftyfour degreesFahrenheit. I had every reason to believe from this that our descent wasfar more horizontal than vertical. As for discovering the exact depth towhich we had attained nothing could be easier. The Professor as headvanced measured the angles of deviation and inclination but he keptthe result of his observations to himself.About eight oclock in the evening my uncle gave the signal forhalting. Hans seated himself on the ground. The lamps were hung tofissures in the lava rock. We were now in a large cavern where air wasnot wanting. On the contrary it abounded. What could be the cause ofthisto what atmospheric agitation could be ascribed this draught Butthis was a question which I did not care to discuss just then. Fatigueand hunger made me incapable of reasoning. An unceasing march of sevenhours had not been kept up without great exhaustion. I was really andtruly worn out and delighted enough I was to hear the word Halt.Hans laid out some provisions on a lump of lava and we each supped withkeen relish. One thing however caused us great uneasinessour waterreserve was already half exhausted. My uncle had full confidence infinding subterranean resources but hitherto we had completely failed inso doing. I could not help calling my uncles attention to thecircumstance.And you are surprised at this total absence of springs he said.DoubtlessI am very uneasy on the point. We have certainly not enoughwater to last us five days.Be quite easy on that matter continued my uncle. I answer for it weshall find plenty of waterin fact far more than we shall want.But whenWhen we once get through this crust of lava. How can you expect springsto force their way through these solid stone wallsBut what is there to prove that this concrete mass of lava does notextend to the centre of the earth I dont think we have as yet donemuch in a vertical way.What puts that into your head my boy asked my uncle mildly.Well it appears to me that if we had descended very far below thelevel of the seawe should find it rather hotter than we have.According to your system said my uncle but what does thethermometer sayScarcely fifteen degrees by Reaumur which is only an increase of ninesince our departure.Well and what conclusion does that bring you to inquired theProfessor.The deduction I draw from this is very simple. According to the mostexact observations the augmentation of the temperature of the interiorof the earth is one degree for every hundred feet. But certain localcauses may considerably modify this figure. Thus at Yakoust in Siberiait has been remarked that the heat increases a degree every thirtysixfeet. The difference evidently depends on the conductibility of certainrocks. In the neighborhood of an extinct volcano it has been remarkedthat the elevation of temperature was only one degree in everyfiveandtwenty feet. Let us then go upon this calculationwhich isthe most favorableand calculate.Calculate away my boy.Nothing easier said I pulling out my notebook and pencil. Ninetimes one hundred and twentyfive feet make a depth of eleven hundredand twentyfive feet.Archimedes could not have spoken more geometrically.WellWell according to my observations we are at least ten thousand feetbelow the level of the sea.Can it be possibleEither my calculation is correct or there is no truth in figures.The calculations of the Professor were perfectly correct. We werealready six thousand feet deeper down in the bowels of the earth thananyone had ever been before. The lowest known depth to which man hadhitherto penetrated was in the mines of Kitzbuhel in the Tirol andthose of Wurttemberg.The temperature which should have been eightyone was in this placeonly fifteen. This was a matter for serious consideration.CHAPTER THE EASTERN TUNNELThe next day was Tuesday the th of Juneand at six oclock in themorning we resumed our journey.We still continued to follow the gallery of lava a perfect naturalpathway as easy of descent as some of those inclined planes which invery old German houses serve the purpose of staircases. This went onuntil seventeen minutes past twelve the precise instant at which werejoined Hans who having been somewhat in advance had suddenlystopped.At last cried my uncle we have reached the end of the shaft.I looked wonderingly about me. We were in the centre of four crosspathssomber and narrow tunnels. The question now arose as to which itwas wise to take and this of itself was no small difficulty.My uncle who did not wish to appear to have any hesitation about thematter before myself or the guide at once made up his mind. He pointedquietly to the eastern tunnel and without delay we entered within itsgloomy recesses.Besides had he entertained any feeling of hesitation it might have beenprolonged indefinitely for there was no indication by which todetermine on a choice. It was absolutely necessary to trust to chanceand good fortuneThe descent of this obscure and narrow gallery was very gradual andwinding. Sometimes we gazed through a succession of arches its coursevery like the aisles of a Gothic cathedral. The great artistic sculptorsand builders of the Middle Ages might have here completed their studieswith advantage. Many most beautiful and suggestive ideas ofarchitectural beauty would have been discovered by them. After passingthrough this phase of the cavernous way we suddenly came about a milefarther on upon a square system of arch adopted by the early Romansprojecting from the solid rock and keeping up the weight of the roof.Suddenly we would come upon a series of low subterranean tunnels whichlooked like beaver holes or the work of foxesthrough whose narrow andwinding ways we had literally to crawlThe heat still remained at quite a supportable degree. With aninvoluntary shudder I reflected on what the heat must have been whenthe volcano of Sneffels was pouring its smoke flames and streams ofboiling lavaall of which must have come up by the road we were nowfollowing. I could imagine the torrents of hot seething stone dartingon bubbling up with accompaniments of smoke steam and sulphurousstenchOnly to think of the consequences I mused if the old volcano wereonce more to set to work.I did not communicate these rather unpleasant reflections to my uncle.He not only would not have understood them but would have beenintensely disgusted. His only idea was to go ahead. He walked he slidhe clambered over piles of fragments he rolled down heaps of brokenlava with an earnestness and conviction it was impossible not toadmire.At six oclock in the evening after a very wearisome journey but onenot so fatiguing as before we had made six miles towards the southwardbut had not gone more than a mile downwards.My uncle as usual gave the signal to halt. We ate our meal inthoughtful silence and then retired to sleep.Our arrangements for the night were very primitive and simple. Atraveling rug in which each rolled himself was all our bedding. We hadno necessity to fear cold or any unpleasant visit. Travelers who burythemselves in the wilds and depths of the African desert who seekprofit and pleasure in the forests of the New World are compelled totake it in turn to watch during the hours of sleep but in this regionof the earth absolute solitude and complete security reigned supreme.We had nothing to fear either from savages or from wild beasts.After a nights sweet repose we awoke fresh and ready for action. Therebeing nothing to detain us we started on our journey. We continued toburrow through the lava tunnel as before. It was impossible to make outthrough what soil we were making way. The tunnel moreover instead ofgoing down into the bowels of the earth became absolutely horizontal.I even thought after some examination that we were actually tendingupwards. About ten oclock in the day this state of things became soclear that finding the change very fatiguing I was obliged to slackenmy pace and finally come to a halt.Well said the Professor quickly what is the matterThe fact is I am dreadfully tired was my earnest reply.What cried my uncle tired after a three hours walk and by so easya roadEasy enough I dare say but very fatiguing.But how can that be when all we have to do is to go downwards.I beg your pardon sir. For some time I have noticed that we are goingupwards.Upwards cried my uncle shrugging his shoulders how can that beThere can be no doubt about it. For the last half hour the slopes havebeen upwardand if we go on in this way much longer we shall findourselves back in Iceland.My uncle shook his head with the air of a man who does not want to beconvinced. I tried to continue the conversation. He would not answer mebut once more gave the signal for departure. His silence I thought wasonly caused by concentrated illtemper.However this might be I once more took up my load and boldly andresolutely followed Hans who was now in advance of my uncle. I did notlike to be beaten or even distanced. I was naturally anxious not to losesight of my companions. The very idea of being left behind lost in thatterrible labyrinth made me shiver as with the ague.Besides if the ascending path was more arduous and painful to clamberI had one source of secret consolation and delight. It was to allappearance taking us back to the surface of the earth. That of itselfwas hopeful. Every step I took confirmed me in my belief and I beganalready to build castles in the air in relation to my marriage with mypretty little cousin.About twelve oclock there was a great and sudden change in the aspectof the rocky sides of the gallery. I first noticed it from thediminution of the rays of light which cast back the reflection of thelamp. From being coated with shining and resplendent lava it becameliving rock. The sides were sloping walls which sometimes became quitevertical.We were now in what the geological professors call a state oftransition in the period of Silurian stones so called because thisspecimen of early formation is very common in England in the countiesformerly inhabited by the Celtic nation known as Silures.I can see clearly now I cried the sediment from the waters whichonce covered the whole earth formed during the second period of itsexistence these schists and these calcareous rocks. We are turning ourbacks on the granite rocks and are like people from Hamburg who wouldgo to Lubeck by way of Hanover.I might just as well have kept my observations to myself. My geologicalenthusiasm got the better however of my cooler judgment and ProfessorHardwigg heard my observations.What is the matter now he said in a tone of great gravity.Well cried I do you not see these different layers of calcareousrocks and the first indication of slate strataWell what thenWe have arrived at that period of the worlds existence when the firstplants and the first animals made their appearance.You think soYes look examine and judge for yourself.I induced the Professor with some difficulty to cast the light of hislamp on the sides of the long winding gallery. I expected someexclamation to burst from his lips. I was very much mistaken. The worthyProfessor never spoke a word.It was impossible to say whether he understood me or not. Perhaps it waspossible that in his pridemy uncle and a learned professorhe did notlike to own that he was wrong in having chosen the eastern tunnel orwas he determined at any price to go to the end of it It was quiteevident we had left the region of lava and that the road by which wewere going could not take us back to the great crater of Mount Sneffels.As we went along I could not help ruminating on the whole question andasked myself if I did not lay too great a stress on these sudden andpeculiar modifications of the earths crust.After all I was very likely to be mistakenand it was within the rangeof probability and possibility that we were not making our way throughthe strata of rocks which I believed I recognized piled on the lowerlayer of granitic formation.At all events if I am right I thought to myself I must certainlyfind some remains of primitive plants and it will be absolutelynecessary to give way to such indubitable evidence. Let us have a goodsearch.I accordingly lost no opportunity of searching and had not gone morethan about a hundred yards when the evidence I sought for cropped up inthe most incontestable manner before my eyes. It was quite natural thatI should expect to find these signs for during the Silurian period theseas contained no fewer than fifteen hundred different animal andvegetable species. My feet so long accustomed to the hard and arid lavasoil suddenly found themselves treading on a kind of soft dust theremains of plants and shells.Upon the walls themselves I could clearly make out the outline as plainas a sun picture of the fucus and the lycopods. The worthy andexcellent Professor Hardwigg could not of course make any mistake aboutthe matter but I believe he deliberately closed his eyes and continuedon his way with a firm and unalterable step.I began to think that he was carrying his obstinacy a great deal toofar. I could no longer act with prudence or composure. I stooped on asudden and picked up an almost perfect shell which had undoubtedlybelonged to some animal very much resembling some of the present day.Having secured the prize I followed in the wake of my uncle.Do you see this I said.Well said the Professor with the most imperturbable tranquillity itis the shell of a crustaceous animal of the extinct order of thetrilobites nothing more I assure you.But cried I much troubled at his coolness do you draw noconclusion from itWell if I may ask what conclusion do you draw from it yourselfWell I thoughtI know my boy what you would say and you are right perfectly andincontestably right. We have finally abandoned the crust of lava and theroad by which the lava ascended. It is quite possible that I may havebeen mistaken but I shall be unable to discover my error until I get tothe end of this gallery.You are quite right as far as that is concerned I replied and Ishould highly approve of your decision if we had not to fear thegreatest of all dangers.And what is thatWant of water.Well my dear Henry it cant be helped. We must put ourselves onrations.And on he went.CHAPTER DEEPER AND DEEPERTHE COAL MINEIn truth we were compelled to put ourselves upon rations. Our supplywould certainly last not more than three days. I found this out aboutsupper time. The worst part of the matter was that in what is calledthe transition rocks it was hardly to be expected we should meet withwaterI had read of the horrors of thirst and I knew that where we were abrief trial of its sufferings would put an end to our adventuresandour lives But it was utterly useless to discuss the matter with myuncle. He would have answered by some axiom from Plato.During the whole of next day we proceeded on our journey through thisinterminable gallery arch after arch tunnel after tunnel. We journeyedwithout exchanging a word. We had become as mute and reticent as Hansour guide.The road had no longer an upward tendency at all events if it had itwas not to be made out very clearly. Sometimes there could be no doubtthat we were going downwards. But this inclination was scarcely to bedistinguished and was by no means reassuring to the Professor becausethe character of the strata was in no wise modified and the transitioncharacter of the rocks became more and more marked.It was a glorious sight to see how the electric light brought out thesparkles in the walls of the calcareous rocks and the old redsandstone. One might have fancied oneself in one of those deep cuttingsin Devonshire which have given their name to this kind of soil. Somemagnificent specimens of marble projected from the sides of the gallerysome of an agate grey with white veins of variegated character othersof a yellow spotted color with red veins farther off might be seensamples of color in which cherrytinted seams were to be found in alltheir brightest shades.The greater number of these marbles were stamped with the marks ofprimitive animals. Since the previous evening nature and creation hadmade considerable progress. Instead of the rudimentary trilobites Iperceived the remains of a more perfect order. Among others the fish inwhich the eye of a geologist has been able to discover the first form ofthe reptile.The Devonian seas were inhabited by a vast number of animals of thisspecies which were deposited in tens of thousands in the rocks of newformation.It was quite evident to me that we were ascending the scale of animallife of which man forms the summit. My excellent uncle the Professorappeared not to take notice of these warnings. He was determined at anyrisk to proceed.He must have been in expectation of one of two things either that avertical well was about to open under his feet and thus allow him tocontinue his descent or that some insurmountable obstacle would compelus to stop and go back by the road we had so long traveled. But eveningcame again and to my horror neither hope was doomed to be realizedOn Friday after a night when I began to feel the gnawing agony ofthirst and when in consequence appetite decreased our little band roseand once more followed the turnings and windings the ascents anddescents of this interminable gallery. All were silent and gloomy. Icould see that even my uncle had ventured too far.After about ten hours of further progressa progress dull andmonotonous to the last degreeI remarked that the reverberation andreflection of our lamps upon the sides of the tunnel had singularlydiminished. The marble the schist the calcareous rocks the redsandstone had disappeared leaving in their places a dark and gloomywall somber and without brightness. When we reached a remarkably narrowpart of the tunnel I leaned my left hand against the rock.When I took my hand away and happened to glance at it it was quiteblack. We had reached the coal strata of the Central Earth.A coal mine I cried.A coal mine without miners responded my uncle a little severely.How can we tellI can tell replied my uncle in a sharp and doctorial tone. I amperfectly certain that this gallery through successive layers of coalwas not cut by the hand of man. But whether it is the work of nature ornot is of little concern to us. The hour for our evening meal hascomelet us sup.Hans the guide occupied himself in preparing food. I had come to thatpoint when I could no longer eat. All I cared about were the few dropsof water which fell to my share. What I suffered it is useless torecord. The guides gourd not quite half full was all that was leftfor us threeHaving finished their repast my two companions laid themselves downupon their rugs and found in sleep a remedy for their fatigue andsufferings. As for me I could not sleep I lay counting the hours untilmorning.The next morning Saturday at six oclock we started again. Twentyminutes later we suddenly came upon a vast excavation. From its mightyextent I saw at once that the hand of man could have had nothing to dowith this coal mine the vault above would have fallen in as it was itwas only held together by some miracle of nature.This mighty natural cavern was about a hundred feet wide by about ahundred and fifty high. The earth had evidently been cast apart by someviolent subterranean commotion. The mass giving way to some prodigiousupheaving of nature had split in two leaving the vast gap into whichwe inhabitants of the earth had penetrated for the first time.The whole singular history of the coal period was written on those darkand gloomy walls. A geologist would have been able easily to follow thedifferent phases of its formation. The seams of coal were separated bystrata of sandstone a compact clay which appeared to be crushed downby the weight from above.At that period of the world which preceded the secondary epoch theearth was covered by a coating of enormous and rich vegetation due tothe double action of tropical heat and perpetual humidity. A vastatmospheric cloud of vapor surrounded the earth on all sides preventingthe rays of the sun from ever reaching it.Hence the conclusion that these intense heats did not arise from thisnew source of caloric.Perhaps even the star of day was not quite ready for its brilliantworkto illumine a universe. Climates did not as yet exist and a levelheat pervaded the whole surface of the globethe same heat existing atthe North Pole as at the equator.Whence did it come From the interior of the earthIn spite of all the learned theories of Professor Hardwigg a fierce andvehement fire certainly burned within the entrails of the greatspheroid. Its action was felt even to the very topmost crust of theearth the plants then in existence being deprived of the vivifyingrays of the sun had neither buds nor flowers nor odor but theirroots drew a strong and vigorous life from the burning earth of earlydays.There were but few of what may be called treesonly herbaceous plantsimmense turfs briers mosses rare families which however in thosedays were counted by tens and tens of thousands.It is entirely to this exuberant vegetation that coal owes its origin.The crust of the vast globe still yielded under the influence of theseething boiling mass which was forever at work beneath. Hence arosenumerous fissures and continual falling in of the upper earth. Thedense mass of plants being beneath the waters soon formed themselvesinto vast agglomerations.Then came about the action of natural chemistry in the depths of theocean the vegetable mass at first became turf then thanks to theinfluence of gases and subterranean fermentation they underwent thecomplete process of mineralization.In this manner in early days were formed those vast and prodigiouslayers of coal which an everincreasing consumption must utterly useup in about three centuries more if people do not find some moreeconomic light than gas and some cheaper motive power than steam.All these reflections the memories of my school studies came to mymind while I gazed upon these mighty accumulations of coal whoseriches however are scarcely likely to be ever utilized. The working ofthese mines could only be carried out at an expense that would neveryield a profit.The matter however is scarcely worthy consideration when coal isscattered over the whole surface of the globe within a few yards of theupper crust. As I looked at these untouched strata therefore I knewthey would remain as long as the world lasts.While we still continued our journey I alone forgot the length of theroad by giving myself up wholly to these geological considerations. Thetemperature continued to be very much the same as while we weretraveling amid the lava and the schists. On the other hand my sense ofsmell was much affected by a very powerful odor. I immediately knew thatthe gallery was filled to overflowing with that dangerous gas the minerscall fire damp the explosion of which has caused such fearful andterrible accidents making a hundred widows and hundreds of orphans in asingle hour.Happily we were able to illumine our progress by means of the Ruhmkorffapparatus. If we had been so rash and imprudent as to explore thisgallery torch in hand a terrible explosion would have put an end toour travels simply because no travelers would be left.Our excursion through this wondrous coal mine in the very bowels of theearth lasted until evening. My uncle was scarcely able to conceal hisimpatience and dissatisfaction at the road continuing still to advancein a horizontal direction.The darkness dense and opaque a few yards in advance and in the rearrendered it impossible to make out what was the length of the gallery.For myself I began to believe that it was simply interminable andwould go on in the same manner for months.Suddenly at six oclock we stood in front of a wall. To the right tothe left above below nowhere was there any passage. We had reached aspot where the rocks said in unmistakable accentsNo Thoroughfare.I stood stupefied. The guide simply folded his arms. My uncle wassilent.Well well so much the better cried my uncle at last I now knowwhat we are about. We are decidedly not upon the road followed bySaknussemm. All we have to do is to go back. Let us take one nightsgood rest and before three days are over I promise you we shall haveregained the point where the galleries divided.Yes we may if our strength lasts as long I cried in a lamentablevoice.And why notTomorrow among us three there will not be a drop of water. It is justgone.And your courage with it said my uncle speaking in a severe tone.What could I say I turned round on my side and from sheer exhaustionfell into a heavy sleep disturbed by dreams of water And I awokeunrefreshed.I would have bartered a diamond mine for a glass of pure spring waterCHAPTER THE WRONG ROADNext day our departure took place at a very early hour. There was notime for the least delay. According to my account we had five dayshard work to get back to the place where the galleries divided.I can never tell all the sufferings we endured upon our return. My unclebore them like a man who has been in the wrongthat is withconcentrated and suppressed anger Hans with all the resignation of hispacific character and II confess that I did nothing but complain anddespair. I had no heart for this bad fortune.But there was one consolation. Defeat at the outset would probably upsetthe whole journeyAs I had expected from the first our supply of water gave completelyout on our first days march. Our provision of liquids was reduced toour supply of Schiedam but this horriblenay I will say itthisinfernal liquor burnt the throat and I could not even bear the sight ofit. I found the temperature to be stifling. I was paralyzed withfatigue. More than once I was about to fall insensible to the ground.The whole party then halted and the worthy Icelander and my excellentuncle did their best to console and comfort me. I could howeverplainly see that my uncle was contending painfully against the extremefatigues of our journey and the awful torture generated by the absenceof water.At length a time came when I ceased to recollect anythingwhen all wasone awfull hideous fantastic dreamAt last on Tuesday the seventh of the month of July after crawling onour hands and knees for many hours more dead than alive we reached thepoint of junction between the galleries. I lay like a log an inert massof human flesh on the arid lava soil. It was then ten in the morning.Hans and my uncle leaning against the wall tried to nibble away atsome pieces of biscuit while deep groans and sighs escaped from myscorched and swollen lips. Then I fell off into a kind of deep lethargy.Presently I felt my uncle approach and lift me up tenderly in his arms.Poor boy I heard him say in a tone of deep commiseration.I was profoundly touched by these words being by no means accustomed tosigns of womanly weakness in the Professor. I caught his trembling handsin mine and gave them a gentle pressure. He allowed me to do so withoutresistance looking at me kindly all the time. His eyes were wet withtears.I then saw him take the gourd which he wore at his side. To my surpriseor rather to my stupefaction he placed it to my lips.Drink my boy he said.Was it possible my ears had not deceived me Was my uncle mad I lookedat him with I am sure quite an idiotic expression. I could notbelieve him. I too much feared the counteraction of disappointment.Drink he said again.Had I heard aright Before however I could ask myself the question asecond time a mouthful of water cooled my parched lips and throatonemouthful but I do believe it brought me back to life.I thanked my uncle by clasping my hands. My heart was too full to speak.Yes said he one mouthful of water the very lastdo you hear myboythe very last I have taken care of it at the bottom of my bottleas the apple of my eye. Twenty times a hundred times I have resistedthe fearful desire to drink it. Butnono Harry I saved it for you.My dear uncle I exclaimed and the big tears rolled down my hot andfeverish cheeks.Yes my poor boy I knew that when you reached this place thiscrossroad in the earth you would fall down half dead and I saved mylast drop of water in order to restore you.Thanks I cried thanks from my heart.As little as my thirst was really quenched I had nevertheless partiallyrecovered my strength. The contracted muscles of my throat relaxedandthe inflammation of my lips in some measure subsided. At all events Iwas able to speak.Well I said there can be no doubt now as to what we have to do.Water has utterly failed us our journey is therefore at an end. Let usreturn.While I spoke thus my uncle evidently avoided my face he held down hishead his eyes were turned in every possible direction but the rightone.Yes I continued getting excited by my own words we must go back toSneffels. May heaven give us strength to enable us once more to revisitthe light of day. Would that we now stood on the summit of the crater.Go back said my uncle speaking to himself and must it be soGo backyes and without losing a single moment I vehemently cried.For some moments there was silence under that dark and gloomy vault.So my dear Harry said the Professor in a very singular tone ofvoice those few drops of water have not sufficed to restore yourenergy and courage.Courage I cried.I see that you are quite as downcast as beforeand still give way todiscouragement and despair.What then was the man made of and what other projects were enteringhis fertile and audacious brainYou are not discouraged sirWhat Give up just as we are on the verge of success he cried.Never never shall it be said that Professor Hardwigg retreated.Then we must make up our minds to perish I cried with a helplesssigh.No Harry my boy certainly not. Go leave me I am very far fromdesiring your death. Take Hans with you. iI will go on alone.iYou ask us to leave youLeave me I say. I have undertaken this dangerous and perilousadventure. I will carry it to the endor I will never return to thesurface of Mother Earth. Go Harryonce more I say to yougoMy uncle as he spoke was terribly excited. His voice which before hadbeen tender almost womanly became harsh and menacing. He appeared tobe struggling with desperate energy against the impossible. I did notwish to abandon him at the bottom of that abyss while on the otherhand the instinct of preservation told me to fly.Meanwhile our guide was looking on with profound calmness andindifference. He appeared to be an unconcerned party and yet heperfectly well knew what was going on between us. Our gesturessufficiently indicated the different roads each wished to followandwhich each tried to influence the other to undertake. But Hans appearednot to take the slightest interest in what was really a question of lifeand death for us all but waited quite ready to obey the signal whichshould say go aloft or to resume his desperate journey into theinterior of the earth.How then I wished with all my heart and soul that I could make himunderstand my words. My representations my sighs and groans theearnest accents in which I should have spoken would have convinced thatcold hard nature. Those fearful dangers and perils of which the stolidguide had no idea I would have pointed them out to himI would haveas it were made him see and feel. Between us we might have convincedthe obstinate Professor. If the worst had come to the worst we couldhave compelled him to return to the summit of Sneffels.I quietly approached Hans. I caught his hand in mine. He never moved amuscle. I indicated to him the road to the top of the crater. Heremained motionless. My panting form my haggard countenance must haveindicated the extent of my sufferings. The Icelander gently shook hishead and pointed to my uncle.Master he said.The word is Icelandic as well as English.The master I cried beside myself with furymadman noI tell youhe is not the master of our lives we must fly we must drag him withus do you hear me Do you understand me I sayI have already explained that I held Hans by the arm. I tried to makehim rise from his seat. I struggled with him and tried to force himaway. My uncle now interposed.My good Henry be calm he said. You will obtain nothing from mydevoted follower therefore listen to what I have to say.I folded my arms as well as I could and looked my uncle full in theface.This wretched want of water he said is the sole obstacle to thesuccess of my project. In the entire gallery made of lava schist andcoal it is true we found not one liquid molecule. It is quite possiblethat we may be more fortunate in the western tunnel.My sole reply was to shake my head with an air of deep incredulity.Listen to me to the end said the Professor in his wellknownlecturing voice. While you lay yonder without life or motion Iundertook a reconnoitering journey into the conformation of this othergallery. I have discovered that it goes directly downwards into thebowels of the earth and in a few hours will take us to the old graniticformation. In this we shall undoubtedly find innumerable springs. Thenature of the rock makes this a mathematical certainty and instinctagrees with logic to say that it is so. Now this is the seriousproposition which I have to make to you. When Christopher Columbus askedof his men three days to discover the land of promise his men illterrified and hopeless yet gave him three daysand the New World wasdiscovered. Now I the Christopher Columbus of this subterranean regiononly ask of you one more day. If when that time is expired I have notfound the water of which we are in search I swear to you I will giveup my mighty enterprise and return to the earths surface.Despite my irritation and despair I knew how much it cost my uncle tomake this proposition and to hold such conciliatory language. Under thecircumstances what could I do but yieldWell I cried let it be as you wish and may heaven reward yoursuperhuman energy. But as unless we discover water our hours arenumbered let us lose no time but go ahead.CHAPTER THE WESTERN GALLERYA NEW ROUTEOur descent was now resumed by means of the second gallery. Hans took uphis post in front as usual. We had not gone more than a hundred yardswhen the Professor carefully examined the walls.This is the primitive formationwe are on the right roadonwards isour hopeWhen the whole earth got cool in the first hours of the worlds morningthe diminution of the volume of the earth produced a state ofdislocation in its upper crust followed by ruptures crevasses andfissures. The passage was a fissure of this kind through which agesago had flowed the eruptive granite. The thousand windings and turningsformed an inextricable labyrinth through the ancient soil.As we descended successions of layers composing the primitive soilappeared with the utmost fidelity of detail. Geological scienceconsiders this primitive soil as the base of the mineral crust and ithas recognized that it is composed of three different strata or layersall resting on the immovable rock known as granite.No mineralogists had even found themselves placed in such a marvelousposition to study nature in all her real and naked beauty. The soundingrod a mere machine could not bring to the surface of the earth theobjects of value for the study of its internal structure which we wereabout to see with our own eyes to touch with our own hands.Remember that I am writing this after the journey.Across the streak of the rocks colored by beautiful green tints woundmetallic threads of copper of manganese with traces of platinum andgold. I could not help gazing at these riches buried in the entrails ofMother Earth and of which no man would have the enjoyment to the end oftime These treasuresmighty and inexhaustible were buried in themorning of the earths history at such awful depths that no crowbar orpickax will ever drag them from their tombThe light of our Ruhmkorffs coil increased tenfold by the myriad ofprismatic masses of rock sent its jets of fire in every direction andI could fancy myself traveling through a huge hollow diamond the raysof which produced myriads of extraordinary effects.Towards six oclock this festival of light began sensibly and visiblyto decrease and soon almost ceased. The sides of the gallery assumed acrystallized tint with a somber hue white mica began to commingle morefreely with feldspar and quartz to form what may be called the truerockthe stone which is hard above all that supports without beingcrushed the four stories of the earths soil.We were walled by an immense prison of graniteIt was now eight oclock and still there was no sign of water. Thesufferings I endured were horrible. My uncle now kept at the head of ourlittle column. Nothing could induce him to stop. I meanwhile had butone real thought. My ear was keenly on the watch to catch the sound of aspring. But no pleasant sound of falling water fell upon my listeningear.But at last the time came when my limbs refused to carry me longer. Icontended heroically against the terrible tortures I endured because Idid not wish to compel my uncle to halt. To him I knew this would be thelast fatal stroke.Suddenly I felt a deadly faintness come over me. My eyes could no longersee my knees shook. I gave one despairing cryand fellHelp help I am dyingMy uncle turned and slowly retraced his steps. He looked at me withfolded arms and then allowed one sentence to escape in hollow accentsfrom his lipsAll is over.The last thing I saw was a face fearfully distorted with pain andsorrow and then my eyes closed.When I again opened them I saw my companions lying near me motionlesswrapped in their huge traveling rugs. Were they asleep or dead Formyself sleep was wholly out of the question. My fainting fit over Iwas wakeful as the lark. I suffered too much for sleep to visit myeyelidsthe more that I thought myself sick unto deathdying. Thelast words spoken by my uncle seemed to be buzzing in my earsall isover And it was probable that he was right. In the state of prostrationto which I was reduced it was madness to think of ever again seeing thelight of day.Above were miles upon miles of the earths crust. As I thought of it Icould fancy the whole weight resting on my shoulders. I was crushedannihilated and exhausted myself in vain attempts to turn in my granitebed.Hours upon hours passed away. A profound and terrible silence reignedaround usa silence of the tomb. Nothing could make itself heardthrough these gigantic walls of granite. The very thought wasstupendous.Presently despite my apathy despite the kind of deadly calm into whichI was cast something aroused me. It was a slight but peculiar noise.While I was watching intently I observed that the tunnel was becomingdark. Then gazing through the dim light that remained I thought I sawthe Icelander taking his departure lamp in hand.Why had he acted thus Did Hans the guide mean to abandon us My unclelay fast asleepor dead. I tried to cry out and arouse him. My voicefeebly issuing from my parched and fevered lips found no echo in thatfearful place. My throat was dry my tongue stuck to the roof of mymouth. The obscurity had by this time become intense and at last eventhe faint sound of the guides footsteps was lost in the blank distance.My soul seemed filled with anguish and death appeared welcome only letit come quickly.Hans is leaving us I cried. HansHans if you are a man comeback.These words were spoken to myself. They could not be heard aloud.Nevertheless after the first few moments of terror were over I wasashamed of my suspicions against a man who hitherto had behaved soadmirably. Nothing in his conduct or character justified suspicion.Moreover a moments reflection reassured me. His departure could not bea flight. Instead of ascending the gallery he was going deeper downinto the gulf. Had he had any bad design his way would have beenupwards.This reasoning calmed me a little and I began to hopeThe good and peaceful and imperturbable Hans would certainly not havearisen from his sleep without some serious and grave motive. Was he benton a voyage of discovery During the deep still silence of the nighthad he at last heard that sweet murmur about which we were all soanxiousCHAPTER WATER WHERE IS IT A BITTER DISAPPOINTMENTDuring a long long weary hour there crossed my wildly delirious brainall sorts of reasons as to what could have aroused our quiet andfaithful guide. The most absurd and ridiculous ideas passed through myhead each more impossible than the other. I believe I was either halfor wholly mad.Suddenly however there arose as it were from the depths of the eartha voice of comfort. It was the sound of footsteps Hans was returning.Presently the uncertain light began to shine upon the walls of thepassage and then it came in view far down the sloping tunnel. At lengthHans himself appeared.He approached my uncle placed his hand upon his shoulder and gentlyawakened him. My uncle as soon as he saw who it was instantly arose.Well exclaimed the Professor.Vatten said the hunter.I did not know a single word of the Danish language and yet by a sortof mysterious instinct I understood what the guide had said.Water water I cried in a wild and frantic tone clapping my handsand gesticulating like a madman.Water murmured my uncle in a voice of deep emotion and gratitude.Hvar WhereNedat. Below.Where below I understood every word. I had caught the hunter by thehands and I shook them heartily while he looked on with perfectcalmness.The preparations for our departure did not take long and we were soonmaking a rapid descent into the tunnel.An hour later we had advanced a thousand yards and descended twothousand feet.At this moment I heard an accustomed and wellknown sound running alongthe floors of the granite rocka kind of dull and sullen roar likethat of a distant waterfall.During the first half hour of our advance not finding the discoveredspring my feelings of intense suffering appeared to return. Once more Ibegan to lose all hope. My uncle however observing how downhearted Iwas again becoming took up the conversation.Hans was right he exclaimed enthusiastically that is the dullroaring of a torrent.A torrent I cried delighted at even hearing the welcome words.Theres not the slightest doubt about it he replied a subterraneanriver is flowing beside us.I made no reply but hastened on once more animated by hope. I begannot even to feel the deep fatigue which hitherto had overpowered me. Thevery sound of this glorious murmuring water already refreshed me. Wecould hear it increasing in volume every moment. The torrent which fora long time could be heard flowing over our heads now ran distinctlyalong the left wall roaring rushing spluttering and still falling.Several times I passed my hand across the rock hoping to find some traceof humidityof the slightest percolation. Alas in vain.Again a half hour passed in the same weary toil. Again we advanced.It now became evident that the hunter during his absence had not beenable to carry his researches any farther. Guided by an instinct peculiarto the dwellers in mountain regions and water finders he smelt theliving spring through the rock. Still he had not seen the preciousliquid. He had neither quenched his own thirst nor brought us one dropin his gourd.Moreover we soon made the disastrous discovery that if our progresscontinued we should soon be moving away from the torrent the sound ofwhich gradually diminished. We turned back. Hans halted at the precisespot where the sound of the torrent appeared nearest.I could bear the suspense and suffering no longer and seated myselfagainst the wall behind which I could hear the water seething andeffervescing not two feet away. But a solid wall of granite stillseparated us from itHans looked keenly at me and strange enough for once I thought I sawa smile on his imperturbable face.He rose from a stone on which he had been seated and took up the lamp.I could not help rising and following. He moved slowly along the firmand solid granite wall. I watched him with mingled curiosity andeagerness. Presently he halted and placed his ear against the dry stonemoving slowly along and listening with the most extreme care andattention. I understood at once that he was searching for the exact spotwhere the torrents roar was most plainly heard. This point he soonfound in the lateral wall on the left side about three feet above thelevel of the tunnel floor.I was in a state of intense excitement. I scarcely dared believe whatthe eiderduck hunter was about to do. It was however impossible in amoment more not to both understand and applaud and even to smother himin my embraces when I saw him raise the heavy crowbar and commence anattack upon the rock itself.Saved I cried.Yes cried my uncle even more excited and delighted than myselfHans is quite right. Oh the worthy excellent man We should neverhave thought of such an idea.And nobody else I think would have done so. Such a process simple asit seemed would most certainly not have entered our heads. Nothingcould be more dangerous than to begin to work with pickaxes in thatparticular part of the globe. Supposing while he was at work a breakupwere to take place and supposing the torrent once having gained an inchwere to take an ell and come pouring bodily through the broken rockNot one of these dangers was chimerical. They were only too real. But atthat moment no fear of falling in of the roof or even of inundation wascapable of stopping us. Our thirst was so intense that to quench it wewould have dug below the bed of old Ocean itself.Hans went quietly to worka work which neither my uncle nor I wouldhave undertaken at any price. Our impatience was so great that if we hadonce begun with pickax and crowbar the rock would soon have split intoa hundred fragments. The guide on the contrary calm ready moderatewore away the hard rock by little steady blows of his instrument makingno attempt at a larger hole than about six inches. As I stood I heardor I thought I heard the roar of the torrent momentarily increasing inloudness and at times I almost felt the pleasant sensation of waterupon my parched lips.At the end of what appeared an age Hans had made a hole which enabledhis crowbar to enter two feet into the solid rock. He had been at workexactly an hour. It appeared a dozen. I was getting wild withimpatience. My uncle began to think of using more violent measures. Ihad the greatest difficulty in checking him. He had indeed just got holdof his crowbar when a loud and welcome hiss was heard. Then a stream orrather jet of water burst through the wall and came out with such forceas to hit the opposite sideHans the guide who was half upset by the shock was scarcely able tokeep down a cry of pain and grief. I understood his meaning whenplunging my hands into the sparkling jet I myself gave a wild andfrantic cry. The water was scalding hotBoiling I cried in bitter disappointment.Well never mind said my uncle it will soon get cool.The tunnel began to be filled by clouds of vapor while a small streamran away into the interior of the earth. In a short time we had somesufficiently cool to drink. We swallowed it in huge mouthfuls.Oh what exalted delightwhat rich and incomparable luxury What wasthis water whence did it come To us what was that The simple factwasit was water and though still with a tingle of warmth about itit brought back to the heart that life which but for it must surelyhave faded away. I drank greedily almost without tasting it.When however I had almost quenched my ravenous thirst I made adiscovery.Why it is chalybeate waterA most excellent stomachic replied my uncle and highly mineralized.Here is a journey worth twenty to Spa.Its very good I replied.I should think so. Water found six miles under ground. There is apeculiarly inky flavor about it which is by no means disagreeable. Hansmay congratulate himself on having made a rare discovery. What do yousay nephew according to the usual custom of travelers to name thestream after himGood said I. And the name of Hansbach Hans Brook was at onceagreed upon.Hans was not a bit more proud after hearing our determination than hewas before. After having taken a very small modicum of the welcomerefreshment he had seated himself in a corner with his usualimperturbable gravity.Now said I it is not worth while letting this water run to waste.What is the use replied my uncle the source from which this riverrises is inexhaustible.Never mind I continued let us fill our goatskin and gourds andthen try to stop the opening up.My advice after some hesitation was followed or attempted to befollowed. Hans picked up all the broken pieces of granite he had knockedout and using some tow he happened to have about him tried to shut upthe fissure he had made in the wall. All he did was to scald his hands.The pressure was too great and all our attempts were utter failures.It is evident I remarked that the upper surface of these springs issituated at a very great height aboveas we may fairly infer from thegreat pressure of the jet.That is by no means doubtful replied my uncle if this column ofwater is about thirtytwo thousand feet high the atmospheric pressuremust be something enormous. But a new idea has just struck me.And what is thatWhy be at so much trouble to close this apertureBecauseI hesitated and stammered having no real reason.When our water bottles are empty we are not at all sure that we shallbe able to fill them observed my uncle.I think that is very probable.Well then let this water run. It will of course naturally follow inour track and will serve to guide and refresh us.I think the idea a good one I cried in reply and with this rivuletas a companion there is no further reason why we should not succeed inour marvelous project.Ah my boy said the Professor laughing after all you are cominground.More than that I am now confident of ultimate success.One moment nephew mine. Let us begin by taking some hours of repose.I had utterly forgotten that it was night. The chronometer howeverinformed me of the fact. Soon we were sufficiently restored andrefreshed and had all fallen into a profound sleep.CHAPTER UNDER THE OCEANBy the next day we had nearly forgotten our past sufferings. The firstsensation I experienced was surprise at not being thirsty and Iactually asked myself the reason. The running stream which flowed inrippling wavelets at my feet was the satisfactory reply.We breakfasted with a good appetite and then drank our fill of theexcellent water. I felt myself quite a new man ready to go anywhere myuncle chose to lead. I began to think. Why should not a man as seriouslyconvinced as my uncle succeed with so excellent a guide as worthyHans and so devoted a nephew as myself These were the brilliant ideaswhich now invaded my brain. Had the proposition now been made to go backto the summit of Mount Sneffels I should have declined the offer in amost indignant manner.But fortunately there was no question of going up. We were about todescend farther into the interior of the earth.Let us be moving I cried awakening the echoes of the old world.We resumed our march on Thursday at eight oclock in the morning. Thegreat granite tunnel as it went round by sinuous and winding wayspresented every now and then sharp turns and in fact all the appearanceof a labyrinth. Its direction however was in general towards thesouthwest. My uncle made several pauses in order to consult his compass.The gallery now began to trend downwards in a horizontal direction withabout two inches of fall in every furlong. The murmuring stream flowedquietly at our feet. I could not but compare it to some familiar spiritguiding us through the earth and I dabbled my fingers in its tepidwater which sang like a naiad as we progressed. My good humor began toassume a mythological character.As for my uncle he began to complain of the horizontal character of theroad. His route he found began to be indefinitely prolonged insteadof sliding down the celestial ray according to his expression.But we had no choice and as long as our road led towards thecentrehowever little progress we made there was no reason tocomplain.Moreover from time to time the slopes were much greater the naiad sangmore loudly and we began to dip downwards in earnest.As yet however I felt no painful sensation. I had not got over theexcitement of the discovery of water.That day and the next we did a considerable amount of horizontal andrelatively very little vertical traveling.On Friday evening the tenth of July according to our estimation weought to have been thirty leagues to the southeast of Reykjavik andabout two leagues and a half deep. We now received a rather startlingsurprise.Under our feet there opened a horrible well. My uncle was so delightedthat he actually clapped his handsas he saw how steep and sharp wasthe descent.Ah ah he cried in rapturous delight this will take us a long way.Look at the projections of the rock. Hah he exclaimed its a fearfulstaircaseHans however who in all our troubles had never given up the ropestook care so to dispose of them as to prevent any accidents. Our descentthen began. I dare not call it a perilous descent for I was already toofamiliar with that sort of work to look upon it as anything but a veryordinary affair.This well was a kind of narrow opening in the massive granite of thekind known as a fissure. The contraction of the terrestrial scaffoldingwhen it suddenly cooled had been evidently the cause. If it had everserved in former times as a kind of funnel through which passed theeruptive masses vomited by Sneffels I was at a loss to explain how ithad left no mark. We were in fact descending a spiral something likethose winding staircases in use in modern houses.We were compelled every quarter of an hour or thereabouts to sit down inorder to rest our legs. Our calves ached. We then seated ourselves onsome projecting rock with our legs hanging over and gossiped while weate a mouthfuldrinking still from the pleasantly warm running streamwhich had not deserted us.It is scarcely necessary to say that in this curiously shaped fissurethe Hansbach had become a cascade to the detriment of its size. It wasstill however sufficient and more for our wants. Besides we knewthat as soon as the declivity ceased to be so abrupt the stream mustresume its peaceful course. At this moment it reminded me of my unclehis impatience and rage while when it flowed more peacefully Ipictured to myself the placidity of the Icelandic guide.During the whole of two days the sixth and seventh of July we followedthe extraordinary spiral staircase of the fissure penetrating twoleagues farther into the crust of the earth which put us five leaguesbelow the level of the sea. On the eighth however at twelve oclock inthe day the fissure suddenly assumed a much more gentle slope stilltrending in a southeast direction.The road now became comparatively easy and at the same time dreadfullymonotonous. It would have been difficult for matters to have turned outotherwise. Our peculiar journey had no chance of being diversified bylandscape and scenery. At all events such was my idea.At length on Wednesday the fifteenth we were actually seven leaguestwentyone miles below the surface of the earth and fifty leaguesdistant from the mountain of Sneffels. Though if the truth be told wewere very tired our health had resisted all suffering and was in amost satisfactory state. Our travelers box of medicaments had not evenbeen opened.My uncle was careful to note every hour the indications of the compassof the manometer and of the thermometer all which he afterwardspublished in his elaborate philosophical and scientific account of ourremarkable voyage. He was therefore able to give an exact relation ofthe situation. When therefore he informed me that we were fiftyleagues in a horizontal direction distant from our starting point Icould not suppress a loud exclamation.What is the matter now cried my uncle.Nothing very important only an idea has entered my head was myreply.Well out with it My boy.It is my opinion that if your calculations are correct we are no longerunder Iceland.Do you think soWe can very easily find out I replied pulling out a map andcompasses.You see I said after careful measurement that I am not mistaken.We are far beyond Cape Portland and those fifty leagues to thesoutheast will take us into the open sea.Under the open sea cried my uncle rubbing his hands with a delightedair.Yes I cried no doubt old Ocean flows over our headsWell my dear boy what can be more natural Do you not know that inthe neighborhood of Newcastle there are coal mines which have beenworked far out under the seaNow my worthy uncle the Professor no doubt regarded this discovery asa very simple fact but to me the idea was by no means a pleasant one.And yet when one came to think the matter over seriously what matteredit whether the plains and mountains of Iceland were suspended over ourdevoted heads or the mighty billows of the Atlantic Ocean The wholequestion rested on the solidity of the granite roof above us. However Isoon got used to the ideal for the passage now level now running downand still always to the southeast kept going deeper and deeper into theprofound abysses of Mother Earth.Three days later on the eighteenth day of July on a Saturday wereached a kind of vast grotto. My uncle here paid Hans his usualrixdollars and it was decided that the next day should be a day ofrest.CHAPTER SUNDAY BELOW GROUNDI Awoke on Sunday morning without any sense of hurry and bustleattendant on an immediate departure. Though the day to be devoted torepose and reflection was spent under such strange circumstances and inso wonderful a place the idea was a pleasant one. Besides we all beganto get used to this kind of existence. I had almost ceased to think ofthe sun of the moon of the stars of the trees houses and towns infact about any terrestrial necessities. In our peculiar position wewere far above such reflections.The grotto was a vast and magnificent hall. Along its granitic soil thestream flowed placidly and pleasantly. So great a distance was it nowfrom its fiery source that its water was scarcely lukewarm and could bedrunk without delay or difficulty.After a frugal breakfast the Professor made up his mind to devote somehours to putting his notes and calculations in order.In the first place he said I have a good many to verify and provein order that we may know our exact position. I wish to be able on ourreturn to the upper regions to make a map of our journey a kind ofvertical section of the globe which will be as it were the profile ofthe expedition.That would indeed be a curious work Uncle but can you make yourobservations with anything like certainty and precisionI can. I have never on any occasion failed to note with great care theangles and slopes. I am certain as to having made no mistake. Take thecompass and examine how she points.I looked at the instrument with care.East one quarter southeast.Very good resumed the Professor noting the observation and goingthrough some rapid calculations. I make out that we have journeyed twohundred and fifty miles from the point of our departure.Then the mighty waves of the Atlantic are rolling over our headsCertainly.And at this very moment it is possible that fierce tempests are ragingabove and that men and ships are battling against the angry blasts justover our headsIt is quite within the range of possibility rejoined my unclesmiling.And that whales are playing in shoals thrashing the bottom of the seathe roof of our adamantine prisonBe quite at rest on that point there is no danger of their breakingthrough. But to return to our calculations. We are to the southeast twohundred and fifty miles from the base of Sneffels and according to mypreceding notes I think we have gone sixteen leagues in a downwarddirection.Sixteen leaguesfifty miles I cried.I am sure of it.But that is the extreme limit allowed by science for the thickness ofthe earths crust I replied referring to my geological studies.I do not contravene that assertion was his quiet answer.And at this stage of our journey according to all known laws on theincrease of heat there should be here a temperature of ififteen hundreddegrees of Reaumuri.There should beyou say my boy.In which case this granite would not exist but be in a state offusion.But you perceive my boy that it is not so and that facts as usualare very stubborn things overruling all theories.I am forced to yield to the evidence of my senses but I amnevertheless very much surprised.What heat does the thermometer really indicate continued thephilosopher.Twentyseven sixtenths.So that science is wrong by fourteen hundred and seventyfour degreesand fourtenths. According to which it is demonstrated that theproportional increase in temperature is an exploded error. Humphry Davyhere shines forth in all his glory. He is right and I have acted wiselyto believe him. Have you any answer to make to this statementHad I chosen to have spoken I might have said a great deal. I in no wayadmitted the theory of Humphry DavyI still held out for the theory ofproportional increase of heat though I did not feel it.I was far more willing to allow that this chimney of an extinct volcanowas covered by lava of a kind refractory to heatin fact a badconductorwhich did not allow the great increase of temperature topercolate through its sides. The hot water jet supported my view of thematter.But without entering on a long and useless discussion or seeking fornew arguments to controvert my uncle I contented myself with taking upfacts as they were.Well sir I take for granted that all your calculations are correctbut allow me to draw from them a rigorous and definite conclusion.Go on my boyhave your say cried my uncle goodhumoredly.At the place where we now are under the latitude of Iceland theterrestrial depth is about fifteen hundred and eightythree leagues.Fifteen hundred eightythree and a quarter.Well suppose we say sixteen hundred in round numbers. Now out of avoyage of sixteen hundred leagues we have completed sixteen.As you say what thenAt the expense of a diagonal journey of no less than eightyfiveleagues.Exactly.We have been twenty days about it.Exactly twenty days.Now sixteen is the hundredth part of our contemplated expedition. If wego on in this way we shall be two thousand days that is about fiveyears and a half going down.The Professor folded his arms listened but did not speak.Without counting that if a vertical descent of sixteen leagues costs usa horizontal of eightyfive we shall have to go about eight thousandleagues to the southeast and we must therefore come out somewhere inthe circumference long before we can hope to reach the centre.Bother your calculations cried my uncle in one of his old rages. Onwhat basis do they rest How do you know that this passage does not takeus direct to the end we require Moreover I have in my favorfortunately a precedent. What I have undertaken to do another hasdone and he having succeeded why should I not be equally successfulI hope indeed you will but still I suppose I may be allowed toYou are allowed to hold your tongue cried Professor Hardwigg whenyou talk so unreasonably as this.I saw at once that the old doctorial Professor was still alive in myuncleand fearful to rouse his angry passions I dropped the unpleasantsubject.Now then he explained consult the manometer. What does thatindicateA considerable amount of pressure.Very good. You see then that by descending slowly and by graduallyaccustoming ourselves to the density of this lower atmosphere we shallnot suffer.Well I suppose not except it may be a certain amount of pain in theears was my rather grim reply.That my dear boy is nothing and you will easily get rid of thatsource of discomfort by bringing the exterior air in communication withthe air contained in your lungs.Perfectly said I for I had quite made up my mind in no wise tocontradict my uncle. I should fancy almost that I should experience acertain amount of satisfaction in making a plunge into this denseatmosphere. Have you taken note of how wonderfully sound is propagatedOf course I have. There can be no doubt that a journey into theinterior of the earth would be an excellent cure for deafness.But then Uncle I ventured mildly to observe this density willcontinue to increase.Yesaccording to a law which however is scarcely defined. It is truethat the intensity of weight will diminish just in proportion to thedepth to which we go. You know very well that it is on the surface ofthe earth that its action is most powerfully felt while on thecontrary in the very centre of the earth bodies cease to have anyweight at all.I know that is the case but as we progress will not the atmospherefinally assume the density of waterI know it when placed under the pressure of seven hundred and tenatmospheres cried my uncle with imperturbable gravity.And when we are still lower down I asked with natural anxiety.Well lower down the density will become even greater.Then how shall we be able to make our way through this atmosphericfogWell my worthy nephew we must ballast ourselves by filling ourpockets with stones said Professor Hardwigg.Faith Uncle you have an answer for everything was my only reply.I began to feel that it was unwise of me to go any farther into the widefield of hypotheses for I should certainly have revived some difficultyor rather impossibility that would have enraged the Professor.It was evident nevertheless that the air under a pressure which mightbe multiplied by thousands of atmospheres would end by becomingperfectly solid and that then admitting our bodies resisted thepressure we should have to stop in spite of all the reasonings in theworld. Facts overcome all arguments.But I thought it best not to urge this argument. My uncle would simplyhave quoted the example of Saknussemm. Supposing the learned Icelandersjourney ever really to have taken placethere was one simple answer tobe madeIn the sixteenth century neither the barometer nor the manometer hadbeen inventedhow then could Saknussemm have been able to discoverwhen he did reach the centre of the earthThis unanswerable and learned objection I however kept to myself andbracing up my courage awaited the course of eventslittle aware of howadventurous yet were to be the incidents of our remarkable journey.The rest of this day of leisure and repose was spent in calculation andconversation. I made it a point to agree with the Professor ineverything but I envied the perfect indifference of Hans who withouttaking any such trouble about the cause and effect went blindly onwardswherever destiny chose to lead him.CHAPTER ALONEIt must in all truth be confessed things as yet had gone on well and Ishould have acted in bad taste to have complained. If the true medium ofour difficulties did not increase it was within the range ofpossibility that we might ultimately reach the end of our journey. Thenwhat glory would be ours I began in the newly aroused ardor of my soulto speak enthusiastically to the Professor. Well was I serious Thewhole state in which we existed was a mysteryand it was impossible toknow whether or not I was in earnest.For several days after our memorable halt the slopes became morerapidsome were even of a most frightful characteralmost vertical sothat we were forever going down into the solid interior mass. Duringsome days we actually descended a league and a half even two leaguestowards the centre of the earth. The descents were sufficientlyperilous and while we were engaged in them we learned fully toappreciate the marvelous coolness of our guide Hans. Without him weshould have been wholly lost. The grave and impassible Icelander devotedhimself to us with the most incomprehensible sangfroid and ease andthanks to him many a dangerous pass was got over where but for himwe should inevitably have stuck fast.His silence increased every day. I think that we began to be influencedby this peculiar trait in his character. It is certain that theinanimate objects by which you are surrounded have a direct action onthe brain. It must be that a man who shuts himself up between four wallsmust lose the faculty of associating ideas and words. How many personscondemned to the horrors of solitary confinement have gone madsimplybecause the thinking faculties have lain dormantDuring the two weeks that followed our last interesting conversationthere occurred nothing worthy of being especially recorded.I have while writing these memoirs taxed my memory in vain for oneincident of travel during this particular period.But the next event to be related is terrible indeed. Its very memoryeven now makes my soul shudder and my blood run cold.It was on the seventh of August. Our constant and successive descentshad taken us quite thirty leagues into the interior of the earth thatis to say that there were above us thirty leagues nearly a hundredmiles of rocks and oceans and continents and towns to say nothingof living inhabitants. We were in a southeasterly direction about twohundred leagues from Iceland.On that memorable day the tunnel had begun to assume an almosthorizontal course.I was on this occasion walking on in front. My uncle had charge of oneof the Ruhmkorff coils I had possession of the other. By means of itslight I was busy examining the different layers of granite. I wascompletely absorbed in my work.Suddenly halting and turning round I found that I was aloneWell thought I to myself I have certainly been walking too fastorelse Hans and my uncle have stopped to rest. The best thing I can do isto go back and find them. Luckily there is very little ascent to tireme.I accordingly retraced my steps and while doing so walked for at leasta quarter of an hour. Rather uneasy I paused and looked eagerly around.Not a living soul. I called aloud. No reply. My voice was lost amid themyriad cavernous echoes it arousedI began for the first time to feel seriously uneasy. A cold shiver shookmy whole body and perspiration chill and terrible burst upon my skin.I must be calm I said speaking aloud as boys whistle to drive awayfear. There can be no doubt that I shall find my companions. Therecannot be two roads. It is certain that I was considerably ahead all Ihave to do is to go back.Having come to this determination I ascended the tunnel for at leasthalf an hour unable to decide if I had ever seen certain landmarksbefore. Every now and then I paused to discover if any loud appeal wasmade to me well knowing that in that dense and intensified atmosphere Ishould hear it a long way off. But no. The most extraordinary silencereigned in this immense gallery. Only the echoes of my own footstepscould be heard.At last I stopped. I could scarcely realize the fact of my isolation. Iwas quite willing to think that I had made a mistake but not that I waslost. If I had made a mistake I might find my way if lostI shudderedto think of it.Come come said I to myself since there is only one road and theymust come by it we shall at last meet. All I have to do is still to goupwards. Perhaps however not seeing me and forgetting I was aheadthey may have gone back in search of me. Still even in this case if Imake haste I shall get up to them. There can be no doubt about thematter.But as I spoke these last words aloud it would have been quite clear toany listenerhad there been onethat I was by no means convinced ofthe fact. Moreover in order to associate together these simple ideas andto reunite them under the form of reasoning required some time. I couldnot all at once bring my brain to think.Then another dread doubt fell upon my soul. After all was I ahead Ofcourse I was. Hans was no doubt following behind preceded by my uncle. Iperfectly recollected his having stopped for a moment to strap hisbaggage on his shoulder. I now remembered this trifling detail. It wasI believe just at that very moment that I had determined to continue myroute.Again thought I reasoning as calmly as was possible there isanother sure means of not losing my way a thread to guide me throughthe labyrinthine subterraneous retreatone which I had forgottenmyfaithful river.This course of reasoning roused my drooping spirits and I resolved toresume my journey without further delay. No time was to be lost.It was at this moment that I had reason to bless the thoughtfulness ofmy uncle when he refused to allow the eider hunter to close theorifices of the hot springthat small fissure in the great mass ofgranite. This beneficent spring after having saved us from thirst duringso many days would now enable me to regain the right road.Having come to this mental decision I made up my mind before I startedupwards that ablution would certainly do me a great deal of good.I stopped to plunge my hands and forehead in the pleasant water of theHansbach stream blessing its presence as a certain consolation.Conceive my horror and stupefactionI was treading a hard dustyshingly road of granite. The stream on which I reckoned had whollydisappearedCHAPTER LOSTNo words in any human language can depict my utter despair. I wasliterally buried alive with no other expectation before me but to diein all the slow horrible torture of hunger and thirst.Mechanically I crawled about feeling the dry and arid rock. Never to myfancy had I ever felt anything so dry.But I frantically asked myself how had I lost the course of theflowing stream There could be no doubt it had ceased to flow in thegallery in which I now was. Now I began to understand the cause of thestrange silence which prevailed when last I tried if any appeal from mycompanions might perchance reach my ear.It so happened that when I first took an imprudent step in the wrongdirection I did not perceive the absence of the allimportant stream.It was now quite evident that when we halted another tunnel must havereceived the waters of the little torrent and that I had unconsciouslyentered a different gallery. To what unknown depths had my companionsgone Where was IHow to get back Clue or landmark there was absolutely none My feetleft no signs on the granite and shingle. My brain throbbed with agonyas I tried to discover the solution of this terrible problem. Mysituation after all sophistry and reflection had finally to be summedup in three awful wordsiLosti Lost LOSTLost at a depth which to my finite understanding appeared to beimmeasurable.These thirty leagues of the crust of the earth weighed upon my shoulderslike the globe on the shoulders of Atlas. I felt myself crushed by theawful weight. It was indeed a position to drive the sanest man tomadnessI tried to bring my thoughts back to the things of the world so longforgotten. It was with the greatest difficulty that I succeeded in doingso. Hamburg the house on the Konigstrasse my dear cousin Gretchenallthat world which had before vanished like a shadow floated before my nowvivid imagination.There they were before me but how unreal. Under the influence of aterrible hallucination I saw all the incidents of our journey passbefore me like the scenes of a panorama. The ship and its inmatesIceland M. Fridriksson and the great summit of Mount Sneffels I saidto myself that if in my position I retained the most faint and shadowyoutline of a hope it would be a sure sign of approaching delirium. Itwere better to give way wholly to despairIn fact did I but reason with calmness and philosophy what human powerwas there in existence able to take me back to the surface of the earthand ready too to split asunder to rend in twain those huge and mightyvaults which stand above my head Who could enable me to find myroadand regain my companionsInsensate folly and madness to entertain even a shadow of hopeOh Uncle was my despairing cry.This was the only word of reproach which came to my lips for Ithoroughly understood how deeply and sorrowfully the worthy Professorwould regret my loss and how in his turn he would patiently seek forme.When I at last began to resign myself to the fact that no further aidwas to be expected from man and knowing that I was utterly powerless todo anything for my own salvation I kneeled with earnest fervor andasked assistance from Heaven. The remembrance of my innocent childhoodthe memory of my mother known only in my infancy came welling forthfrom my heart. I had recourse to prayer. And little as I had a right tobe remembered by Him whom I had forgotten in the hour of prosperity andwhom I so tardily invoked I prayed earnestly and sincerely.This renewal of my youthful faith brought about a much greater amount ofcalm and I was enabled to concentrate all my strength and intelligenceon the terrible realities of my unprecedented situation.I had about me that which I had at first wholly forgottenthree daysprovisions. Moreover my water bottle was quite full. Nevertheless theone thing which it was impossible to do was to remain alone. Try to findmy companions I must at any price. But which course should I takeShould I go upwards or again descend Doubtless it was right to retracemy steps in an upward direction.By doing this with care and coolness I must reach the point where I hadturned away from the rippling stream. I must find the fatal bifurcationor fork. Once at this spot once the river at my feet I could at allevents regain the awful crater of Mount Sneffels. Why had I not thoughtof this before This at last was a reasonable hope of safety. The mostimportant thing then to be done was to discover the bed of theHansbach.After a slight meal and a draught of water I rose like a giantrefreshed. Leaning heavily on my pole I began the ascent of thegallery. The slope was very rapid and rather difficult. But I advancedhopefully and carefully like a man who at last is making his way out ofa forest and knows there is only one road to follow.During one whole hour nothing happened to check my progress. As Iadvanced I tried to recollect the shape of the tunnelto recall to mymemory certain projections of rocksto persuade myself that I hadfollowed certain winding routes before. But no one particular sign couldI bring to mind and I was soon forced to allow that this gallery wouldnever take me back to the point at which I had separated myself from mycompanions. It was absolutely without issuea mere blind alley in theearth.The moment at length came when facing the solid rock I knew my fateand fell inanimate on the arid floorTo describe the horrible state of despair and fear into which I thenfell would now be vain and impossible. My last hope the courage whichhad sustained me drooped before the sight of this pitiless graniterockLost in a vast labyrinth the sinuosities of which spread in everydirection without guide clue or compass I knew it was a vain anduseless task to attempt flight. All that remained to me was to lie downand die. To lie down and die the most cruel and horrible of deathsIn my state of mind the idea came into my head that one day perhapswhen my fossil bones were found their discovery so far below the levelof the earth might give rise to solemn and interesting scientificdiscussions.I tried to cry aloud but hoarse hollow and inarticulate sounds alonecould make themselves heard through my parched lips. I literally pantedfor breath.In the midst of all these horrible sources of anguish and despair a newhorror took possession of my soul. My lamp by falling down had got outof order. I had no means of repairing it. Its light was already becomingpaler and paler and soon would expire.With a strange sense of resignation and despair I watched the luminouscurrent in the coil getting less and less. A procession of shadows movedflashing along the granite wall. I scarcely dared to lower my eyelidsfearing to lose the last spark of this fugitive light. Every instant itseemed to me that it was about to vanish and to leave me foreverinutter darknessAt last one final trembling flame remained in the lamp I followed itwith all my power of vision I gasped for breath I concentrated upon itall the power of my soul as upon the last scintillation of light I wasever destined to see and then I was to be lost forever in Cimmerian andtenebrous shades.A wild and plaintive cry escaped my lips. On earth during the mostprofound and comparatively complete darkness light never allows acomplete destruction and extinction of its power. Light is so diffuseso subtle that it permeates everywhere and whatever little may remainthe retina of the eye will succeed in finding it. In this placenothingthe absolute obscurity made me blind in every sense.My head was now wholly lost. I raised my arms trying the effects of thefeeling in getting against the cold stone wall. It was painful in theextreme. Madness must have taken possession of me. I knew not what Idid. I began to run to fly rushing at haphazard in this inextricablelabyrinth always going downwards running wildly underneath theterrestrial crust like an inhabitant of the subterranean furnacesscreaming roaring howling until bruised by the pointed rocks fallingand picking myself up all covered with blood seeking madly to drink theblood which dripped from my torn features mad because this blood onlytrickled over my face and watching always for this horrid wall whichever presented to me the fearful obstacle against which I could not dashmy head.Where was I going It was impossible to say. I was perfectly ignorant ofthe matter.Several hours passed in this way. After a long time having utterlyexhausted my strength I fell a heavy inert mass along the side of thetunnel and lost consciousness.CHAPTER THE WHISPERING GALLERYWhen at last I came back to a sense of life and being my face was wetbut wet as I soon knew with tears. How long this state ofinsensibility lasted it is quite impossible for me now to say. I had nomeans left to me of taking any account of time. Never since the creationof the world had such a solitude as mine existed. I was completelyabandoned.After my fall I lost much blood. I felt myself flooded with thelifegiving liquid. My first sensation was perhaps a natural one. Whywas I not dead Because I was alive there was something left to do. Itried to make up my mind to think no longer. As far as I was able Idrove away all ideas and utterly overcome by pain and grief I crouchedagainst the granite wall.I just commenced to feel the fainting coming on again and the sensationthat this was the last struggle before complete annihilationwhen on asudden a violent uproar reached my ears. It had some resemblance to theprolonged rumbling voice of thunder and I clearly distinguishedsonorous voices lost one after the other in the distant depths of thegulf.Whence came this noise Naturally it was to be supposed from newphenomena which were taking place in the bosom of the solid mass ofMother Earth The explosion of some gaseous vapors or the fall of somesolid of the granitic or other rock.Again I listened with deep attention. I was extremely anxious to hear ifthis strange and inexplicable sound was likely to be renewed A wholequarter of an hour elapsed in painful expectation. Deep and solemnsilence reigned in the tunnel. So still that I could hear the beatingsof my own heart I waited waited with a strange kind of hopefulness.Suddenly my ear which leaned accidentally against the wall appeared tocatch as it were the faintest echo of a sound. I thought that I heardvague incoherent and distant voices. I quivered all over withexcitement and hopeIt must be hallucination I cried. It cannot be it is not trueBut no By listening more attentively I really did convince myself thatwhat I heard was truly the sound of human voices. To make any meaningout of the sound however was beyond my power. I was too weak even tohear distinctly. Still it was a positive fact that someone was speaking.Of that I was quite certain.There was a moment of fear. A dread fell upon my soul that it might bemy own words brought back to me by a distant echo. Perhaps withoutknowing it I might have been crying aloud. I resolutely closed my lipsand once more placed my ear to the huge granite wall.Yes for certain. It was in truth the sound of human voices.I now by the exercise of great determination dragged myself along thesides of the cavern until I reached a point where I could hear moredistinctly. But though I could detect the sound I could only make outuncertain strange and incomprehensible words. They reached my ear asif they had been spoken in a low tonemurmured as it were afar off.At last I made out the word forlorad repeated several times in a tonebetokening great mental anguish and sorrow.What could this word mean and who was speaking it It must be either myuncle or the guide Hans If therefore I could hear them they mustsurely be able to hear me.Help I cried at the top of my voice help I am dyingI then listened with scarcely a breath I panted for the slightest soundin the darknessa cry a sigh a question But silence reigned supreme.No answer came In this way some minutes passed. A whole flood of ideasflashed through my mind. I began to fear that my voice weakened bysickness and suffering could not reach my companions who were in searchof me.It must be they I cried who else could by any possibility be burieda hundred miles below the level of the earth The mere supposition waspreposterous.I began therefore to listen again with the most breathless attention.As I moved my ears along the side of the place I was in I found amathematical point as it were where the voices appeared to attain theirmaximum of intensity. The word forlorad again distinctly reached my ear.Then came again that rolling noise like thunder which had awakened meout of torpor.I begin to understand I said to myself after some little time devotedto reflection it is not through the solid mass that the sound reachesmy ears. The walls of my cavernous retreat are of solid granite and themost fearful explosion would not make uproar enough to penetrate them.The sound must come along the gallery itself. The place I was in mustpossess some peculiar acoustic properties of its own.Again I listened and this timeyes this timeI heard my namedistinctly pronounced cast as it were into space.It was my uncle the Professor who was speaking. He was in conversationwith the guide and the word which had so often reached my earsforlorad was a Danish expression.Then I understood it all. In order to make myself heard I too mustspeak as it were along the side of the gallery which would carry thesound of my voice just as the wire carries the electric fluid from pointto point.But there was no time to lose. If my companions were only to remove afew feet from where they stood the acoustic effect would be over myWhispering Gallery would be destroyed. I again therefore crawled towardsthe wall and said as clearly and distinctly as I couldUncle Hardwigg.I then awaited a reply.Sound does not possess the property of traveling with such extremerapidity. Besides the density of the air at that depth from light andmotion was very far from adding to the rapidity of circulation. Severalseconds elapsed which to my excited imagination appeared ages andthese words reached my eager ears and moved my wildly beating heartHarry my boy is that youA short delay between question and answer.Yesyes...........Where are you..........Lost..........And your lamp..........Out...........But the guiding stream..........Is lost..........Keep your courage Harry. We will do our best...........One moment my uncle I cried I have no longer strength to answeryour questions. Butfor heavens sakedo youcontinueto speaktome Absolute silence I felt would be annihilation.Keep up your courage said my uncle. As you are so weak do notspeak. We have been searching for you in all directions both by goingupwards and downwards in the gallery. My dear boy I had begun to giveover all hopeand you can never know what bitter tears of sorrow andregret I have shed. At last supposing you to be still on the roadbeside the Hansbach we again descended firing off guns as signals.Now however that we have found you and that our voices reach eachother it may be a long time before we actually meet. We are conversingby means of some extraordinary acoustic arrangement of the labyrinth.But do not despair my dear boy. It is something gained even to heareach other.While he was speaking my brain was at work reflecting. A certainundefined hope vague and shapeless as yet made my heart beat wildly.In the first place it was absolutely necessary for me to know onething. I once more therefore leaned my head against the wall which Ialmost touched with my lips and again spoke.Uncle...........My boy was his answer after a few moments...........It is of the utmost consequence that we should know how far we areasunder...........That is not difficult...........You have your chronometer at hand I asked...........Certainly...........Well take it into your hand. Pronounce my name noting exactly thesecond at which you speak. I will reply as soon as I hear yourwordsand you will then note exactly the moment at which my replyreaches you...........Very good and the mean time between my question and your answer willbe the time occupied by my voice in reaching you...........That is exactly what I mean Uncle was my eager reply...........Are you ready..........Yes...........Well make ready I am about to pronounce your name said theProfessor.I applied my ear close to the sides of the cavernous gallery and assoon as the word Harry reached my ear I turned round and placing mylips to the wall repeated the sound...........Forty seconds said my uncle. There has elapsed forty seconds betweenthe two words. The sound therefore takes twenty seconds to ascend.Now allowing a thousand and twenty feet for every secondwe havetwenty thousand four hundred feeta league and a half and oneeighth.These words fell on my soul like a kind of death knell.A league and a half I muttered in a low and despairing voice...........It shall be got over my boy cried my uncle in a cheery tone dependon us...........But do you know whether to ascend or descend I asked faintly enough...........We have to descend and I will tell you why. You have reached a vastopen space a kind of bare crossroad from which galleries diverge inevery direction. That in which you are now lying must necessarily bringyou to this point for it appears that all these mighty fissures thesefractures of the globes interior radiate from the vast cavern which weat this moment occupy. Rouse yourself then have courage and continueyour route. Walk if you can if not drag yourself alongslide ifnothing else is possible. The slope must be rather rapidand you willfind strong arms to receive you at the end of your journey. Make astart like a good fellow.These words served to rouse some kind of courage in my sinking frame.Farewell for the present good uncle I am about to take my departure.As soon as I start our voices will cease to commingle. Farewell thenuntil we meet again...........Adieu Harryuntil we say Welcome. Such were the last words whichreached my anxious ears before I commenced my weary and almost hopelessjourney.This wonderful and surprising conversation which took place through thevast mass of the earths labyrinth these words exchanged the speakersbeing about five miles apartended with hopeful and pleasantexpressions. I breathed one more prayer to Heaven I sent up words ofthanksgivingbelieving in my inmost heart that He had led me to theonly place where the voices of my friends could reach my ears.This apparently astounding acoustic mystery is easily explainable bysimple natural laws it arose from the conductibility of the rock. Thereare many instances of this singular propagation of sound which are notperceptible in its less mediate positions. In the interior gallery ofSt. Pauls and amid the curious caverns in Sicily these phenomena areobservable. The most marvelous of them all is known as the Ear ofDionysius.These memories of the past of my early reading and studies came freshto my thoughts. Moreover I began to reason that if my uncle and I couldcommunicate at so great a distance no serious obstacle could existbetween us. All I had to do was to follow the direction whence the soundhad reached me and logically putting it I must reach him if mystrength did not fail.I accordingly rose to my feet. I soon found however that I could notwalk that I must drag myself along. The slope as I expected was veryrapid but I allowed myself to slip down.Soon the rapidity of the descent began to assume frightful proportionsand menaced a fearful fall. I clutched at the sides I grasped atprojections of rocks I threw myself backwards. All in vain. My weaknesswas so great I could do nothing to save myself.Suddenly earth failed me.I was first launched into a dark and gloomy void. I then struck againstthe projecting asperities of a vertical gallery a perfect well. My headbounded against a pointed rock and I lost all knowledge of existence.As far as I was concerned death had claimed me for his own.CHAPTER A RAPID RECOVERYWhen I returned to the consciousness of existence I found myselfsurrounded by a kind of semiobscurity lying on some thick and softcoverlets. My uncle was watchinghis eyes fixed intently on mycountenance a grave expression on his face a tear in his eye. At thefirst sigh which struggled from my bosom he took hold of my hand. Whenhe saw my eyes open and fix themselves upon his he uttered a loud cryof joy. He lives he livesYes my good uncle I whispered.My dear boy continued the grim Professor clasping me to his heartyou are savedI was deeply and unaffectedly touched by the tone in which these wordswere uttered and even more by the kindly care which accompanied them.The Professor however was one of those men who must be severely triedin order to induce any display of affection or gentle emotion. At thismoment our friend Hans the guide joined us. He saw my hand in that ofmy uncle and I venture to say that taciturn as he was his eyes beamedwith lively satisfaction.God dag he said.Good day Hans good day I replied in as hearty a tone as I couldassume and now Uncle that we are together tell me where we are. Ihave lost all idea of our position as of everything else.Tomorrow Harry tomorrow he replied. Today you are far too weak.Your head is surrounded with bandages and poultices that must not betouched. Sleep my boy sleep and tomorrow you will know all that yourequire.But I cried let me know what oclock it iswhat day it isIt is now eleven oclock at night and this is once more Sunday. It isnow the ninth of the month of August. And I distinctly prohibit you fromasking any more questions until the tenth of the same.I was if the truth were told very weak indeed and my eyes soon closedinvoluntarily. I did require a good nights rest and I went offreflecting at the last moment that my perilous adventure in the interiorof the earth in total darkness had lasted four daysOn the morning of the next day at my awakening I began to look aroundme. My sleeping place made of all our traveling bedding was in acharming grotto adorned with magnificent stalagmites glittering in allthe colors of the rainbow the floor of soft and silvery sand.A dim obscurity prevailed. No torch no lamp was lighted and yetcertain unexplained beams of light penetrated from without and madetheir way through the opening of the beautiful grotto.I moreover heard a vague and indefinite murmur like the ebb and flowof waves upon a strand and sometimes I verily believed I could hear thesighing of the wind.I began to believe that instead of being awake I must be dreaming.Surely my brain had not been affected by my fall and all that occurredduring the last twentyfour hours was not the frenzied visions ofmadness And yet after some reflection a trial of my faculties I cameto the conclusion that I could not be mistaken. Eyes and ears could notsurely both deceive me.It is a ray of the blessed daylight I said to myself which haspenetrated through some mighty fissure in the rocks. But what is themeaning of this murmur of waves this unmistakable moaning of thesaltsea billows I can hear too plainly enough the whistling of thewind. But can I be altogether mistaken If my uncle during my illnesshas but carried me back to the surface of the earth Has he on myaccount given up his wondrous expedition or in some strange manner hasit come to an endI was puzzling my brain over these and other questions when theProfessor joined me.Good day Harry he cried in a joyous tone. I fancy you are quitewell.I am very much better I replied actually sitting up in my bed.I knew that would be the end of it as you slept both soundly andtranquilly. Hans and I have each taken turn to watch and every hour wehave seen visible signs of amelioration.You must be right Uncle was my reply for I feel as if I could dojustice to any meal you could put before me.You shall eat my boy you shall eat. The fever has left you. Ourexcellent friend Hans has rubbed your wounds and bruises with I know notwhat ointment of which the Icelanders alone possess the secret. Andthey have healed your bruises in the most marvelous manner. Ah hes awise fellow is Master Hans.While he was speaking my uncle was placing before me several articlesof food which despite his earnest injunctions I readily devoured. Assoon as the first rage of hunger was appeased I overwhelmed him withquestions to which he now no longer hesitated to give answers.I then learned for the first time that my providential fall hadbrought me to the bottom of an almost perpendicular gallery. As I camedown amidst a perfect shower of stones the least of which falling onme would have crushed me to death they came to the conclusion that Ihad carried with me an entire dislocated rock. Riding as it were on thisterrible chariot I was cast headlong into my uncles arms. And intothem I fell insensible and covered with blood.It is indeed a miracle was the Professors final remark that youwere not killed a thousand times over. But let us take care never toseparate for surely we should risk never meeting again.Let us take care never again to separate.These words fell with a sort of chill upon my heart. The journey thenwas not over. I looked at my uncle with surprise and astonishment. Myuncle after an instants examination of my countenance said What isthe matter HarryI want to ask you a very serious question. You say that I am all rightin healthCertainly you are.And all my limbs are sound and capable of new exertion I asked.Most undoubtedly.But what about my head was my next anxious question.Well your head except that you have one or two contusions is exactlywhere it ought to beon your shoulders said my uncle laughing.Well my own opinion is that my head is not exactly right. In fact Ibelieve myself slightly delirious.What makes you think soI will explain why I fancy I have lost my senses I cried. Have wenot returned to the surface of Mother EarthCertainly not.Then truly I must be mad for do I not see the light of day do I nothear the whistling of the wind and can I not distinguish the wash of agreat seaAnd that is all that makes you uneasy said my uncle with a smile.Can you explainI will not make any attempt to explain for the whole matter is utterlyinexplicable. But you shall see and judge for yourself. You will thenfind that geological science is as yet in its infancyand that we aredoomed to enlighten the world.Let us advance then I cried eagerly no longer able to restrain mycuriosity.Wait a moment my dear Harry he responded you must take precautionsafter your illness before going into the open air.The open airYes my boy. I have to warn you that the wind is rather violentand Ihave no wish for you to expose yourself without necessary precautions.But I beg to assure you that I am perfectly recovered from my illness.Have just a little patience my boy. A relapse would be inconvenient toall parties. We have no time to loseas our approaching sea voyage maybe of long duration.Sea voyage I cried more bewildered than ever.Yes. You must take another days rest and we shall be ready to go onboard by tomorrow replied my uncle with a peculiar smile.Go on board The words utterly astonished me.Go on boardwhat and how Had we come upon a river a lake had wediscovered some inland sea Was a vessel lying at anchor in some part ofthe interior of the earthMy curiosity was worked up to the very highest pitch. My uncle made vainattempts to restrain me. When at last however he discovered that myfeverish impatience would do more harm than goodand that thesatisfaction of my wishes could alone restore me to a calm state ofmindhe gave way.I dressed myself rapidlyand then taking the precaution to please myuncle of wrapping myself in one of the coverlets I rushed out of thegrotto.CHAPTER THE CENTRAL SEAAt first I saw absolutely nothing. My eyes wholly unused to theeffulgence of light could not bear the sudden brightness and I wascompelled to close them. When I was able to reopen them I stood stillfar more stupefied than astonished. Not all the wildest effects ofimagination could have conjured up such a scene The seathe sea Icried.Yes replied my uncle in a tone of pardonable pride the CentralSea. No future navigator will deny the fact of my having discovered itand hence of acquiring a right of giving it a name.It was quite true. A vast limitless expanse of water the end of a lakeif not of an ocean spread before us until it was lost in the distance.The shore which was very much indented consisted of a beautiful softgolden sand mixed with small shells the longdeserted home of some ofthe creatures of a past age. The waves broke incessantlyand with apeculiarly sonorous murmur to be found in underground localities. Aslight frothy flake arose as the wind blew along the pellucid watersand many a dash of spray was blown into my face. The mightysuperstructure of rock which rose above to an inconceivable height leftonly a narrow openingbut where we stood there was a large margin ofstrand. On all sides were capes and promontories and enormous cliffspartially worn by the eternal breaking of the waves through countlessages And as I gazed from side to side the mighty rocks faded away likea fleecy film of cloud.It was in reality an ocean with all the usual characteristics of aninland sea only horribly wildso rigid cold and savage.One thing startled and puzzled me greatly. How was it that I was able tolook upon that vast sheet of water instead of being plunged in utterdarkness The vast landscape before me was lit up like day. But therewas wanting the dazzling brilliancy the splendid irradiation of thesun the pale cold illumination of the moon the brightness of thestars. The illuminating power in this subterranean region from itstrembling and Rickering character its clear dry whiteness the veryslight elevation of its temperature its great superiority to that ofthe moon was evidently electric something in the nature of the auroraborealis only that its phenomena were constant and able to light upthe whole of the ocean cavern.The tremendous vault above our heads the sky so to speak appeared tobe composed of a conglomeration of nebulous vapors in constant motion.I should originally have supposed that under such an atmosphericpressure as must exist in that place the evaporation of water could notreally take place and yet from the action of some physical law whichescaped my memory there were heavy and dense clouds rolling along thatmighty vault partially concealing the roof. Electric currents producedastonishing play of light and shade in the distance especially aroundthe heavier clouds. Deep shadows were cast beneath and then suddenlybetween two clouds there would come a ray of unusual beauty andremarkable intensity. And yet it was not like the sun for it gave noheat.The effect was sad and excruciatingly melancholy. Instead of a noblefirmament of blue studded with stars there was above me a heavy roofof granite which seemed to crush me.Gazing around I began to think of the theory of the English captain whocompared the earth to a vast hollow sphere in the interior of which theair is retained in a luminous state by means of atmospheric pressurewhile two stars Pluto and Proserpine circled there in their mysteriousorbits. After all suppose the old fellow was rightIn truth we were imprisonedbound as it were in a vast excavation.Its width it was impossible to make out the shore on either handwidening rapidly until lost to sight while its length was equallyuncertain. A haze on the distant horizon bounded our view. As to itsheight we could see that it must be many miles to the roof. Lookingupward it was impossible to discover where the stupendous roof began.The lowest of the clouds must have been floating at an elevation of twothousand yards a height greater than that of terrestrial vapors whichcircumstance was doubtless owing to the extreme density of the air.I use the word cavern in order to give an idea of the place. I cannotdescribe its awful grandeur human language fails to convey an idea ofits savage sublimity. Whether this singular vacuum had or had not beencaused by the sudden cooling of the earth when in a state of fusion Icould not say. I had read of most wonderful and gigantic cavernsbutnone in any way like this.The great grotto of Guachara in Colombia visited by the learnedHumboldt the vast and partially explored Mammoth Cave in Kentuckywhatwere these holes in the earth to that in which I stood in speechlessadmiration with its vapory clouds its electric light and the mightyocean slumbering in its bosom Imagination not description can alonegive an idea of the splendor and vastness of the cave.I gazed at these marvels in profound silence. Words were utterly wantingto indicate the sensations of wonder I experienced. I seemed as I stoodupon that mysterious shore as if I were some wandering inhabitant of adistant planet present for the first time at the spectacle of someterrestrial phenomena belonging to another existence. To give body andexistence to such new sensations would have required the coinage of newwordsand here my feeble brain found itself wholly at fault. I lookedon I thought I reflected I admired in a state of stupefaction notaltogether unmingled with fearThe unexpected spectacle restored some color to my pallid cheeks. Iseemed to be actually getting better under the influence of thisnovelty. Moreover the vivacity of the dense atmosphere reanimated mybody by inflating my lungs with unaccustomed oxygen.It will be readily conceived that after an imprisonment of fortysevendays in a dark and miserable tunnel it was with infinite delight that Ibreathed this saline air. It was like the genial reviving influence ofthe salt sea waves.My uncle had already got over the first surprise.With the Latin poet Horace his idea was that Not to admire is all the art I know To make man happy and to keep him so.Well he said after giving me time thoroughly to appreciate themarvels of this underground sea do you feel strong enough to walk upand downCertainly was my ready answer nothing would give me greaterpleasure.Well then my boy he said lean on my arm and we will stroll alongthe beach.I accepted his offer eagerly and we began to walk along the shores ofthis extraordinary lake. To our left were abrupt rocks piled one uponthe othera stupendous titanic pile down their sides leapedinnumerable cascades which at last becoming limpid and murmuringstreams were lost in the waters of the lake. Light vapors which rosehere and there and floated in fleecy clouds from rock to rockindicated hot springs which also poured their superfluity into the vastreservoir at our feet.Among them I recognized our old and faithful stream the Hansbachwhich lost in that wild basin seemed as if it had been flowing sincethe creation of the world.We shall miss our excellent friend I remarked with a deep sigh.Bah said my uncle testily what matters it That or another it isall the same.I thought the remark ungrateful and felt almost inclined to say so butI forbore.At this moment my attention was attracted by an unexpected spectacle.After we had gone about five hundred yards we suddenly turned a steeppromontory and found ourselves close to a lofty forest It consisted ofstraight trunks with tufted tops in shape like parasols. The air seemedto have no effect upon these treeswhich in spite of a tolerable breezeremained as still and motionless as if they had been petrified.I hastened forward. I could find no name for these singular formations.Did they not belong to the two thousand and more known treesor were weto make the discovery of a new growth By no means. When we at lastreached the forest and stood beneath the trees my surprise gave way toadmiration.In truth I was simply in the presence of a very ordinary product of theearth of singular and gigantic proportions. My uncle unhesitatinglycalled them by their real names.It is only he said in his coolest manner a forest of mushrooms.On close examination I found that he was not mistaken. Judge of thedevelopment attained by this product of damp hot soils. I had heard thatthe Lycoperdon giganteum reaches nine feet in circumference but herewere white mushrooms nearly forty feet high and with tops of equaldimensions. They grew in countless thousandsthe light could not makeits way through their massive substance and beneath them reigned agloomy and mystic darkness.Still I wished to go forward. The cold in the shades of this singularforest was intense. For nearly an hour we wandered about in this visibledarkness. At length I left the spot and once more returned to theshores of the lake to light and comparative warmth.But the amazing vegetation of subterraneous land was not confined togigantic mushrooms. New wonders awaited us at every step. We had notgone many hundred yards when we came upon a mighty group of other treeswith discolored leavesthe common humble trees of Mother Earth of anexorbitant and phenomenal size lycopods a hundred feet high floweringferns as tall as pines gigantic grassesAstonishing magnificent splendid cried my uncle here we havebefore us the whole flora of the second period of the world that oftransition. Behold the humble plants of our gardens which in the firstages of the world were mighty trees. Look around you my dear Harry. Nobotanist ever before gazed on such a sightMy uncles enthusiasm always a little more than was required was nowexcusable.You are right Uncle I remarked. Providence appears to have designedthe preservation in this vast and mysterious hothouse of antediluvianplants to prove the sagacity of learned men in figuring them somarvelously on paper.Well said my boyvery well said it is indeed a mighty hothouse. Butyou would also be within the bounds of reason and common sense if youadded that it is also a vast menagerie.I looked rather anxiously around. If the animals were as exaggerated asthe plants the matter would certainly be serious.A menagerieDoubtless. Look at the dust we are treading under footbehold thebones with which the whole soil of the seashore is coveredBones I replied yes certainly the bones of antediluvian animals.I stooped down as I spoke and picked up one or two singular remainsrelics of a bygone age. It was easy to give a name to these giganticbones in some instances as big as trunks of trees.Here is clearly the lower jawbone of a mastodon I cried almost aswarmly and enthusiastically as my uncle here are the molars of theDinotherium here is a leg bone which belonged to the Megatherium. Youare right Uncle it is indeed a menagerie for the mighty animals towhich these bones once belonged have lived and died on the shores ofthis subterranean sea under the shadow of these plants. Look yonderare whole skeletonsand yetAnd yet nephew said my uncle noticing that I suddenly came to afull stop.I do not understand the presence of such beasts in granite cavernshowever vast and prodigious was my reply.Why not said my uncle with very much of his old professionalimpatience.Because it is well known that animal life only existed on earth duringthe secondary period when the sedimentary soil was formed by thealluviums and thus replaced the hot and burning rocks of the primitiveage.I have listened to you earnestly and with patience Harry and I have asimple and clear answer to your objections and that is that thisitself is a sedimentary soil.How can that be at such enormous depth from the surface of the earthThe fact can be explained both simply and geologically. At a certainperiod the earth consisted only of an elastic crust liable toalternative upward and downward movements in virtue of the law ofattraction. It is very probable that many a landslip took place in thosedays and that large portions of sedimentary soil were cast into hugeand mighty chasms.Quite possible I dryly remarked. But Uncle if these antediluviananimals formerly lived in these subterranean regions what more likelythan that one of these monsters may at this moment be concealed behindone of yonder mighty rocks.As I spoke I looked keenly around examining with care every point ofthe horizon but nothing alive appeared to exist on these desertedshores.I now felt rather fatigued and told my uncle so. The walk andexcitement were too much for me in my weak state. I therefore seatedmyself at the end of a promontory at the foot of which the waves brokein incessant rolls. I looked round a bay formed by projections of vastgranitic rocks. At the extreme end was a little port protected by hugepyramids of stones. A brig and three or four schooners might have lainthere with perfect ease. So natural did it seem that every minute myimagination induced me to expect a vessel coming out under all sail andmaking for the open sea under the influence of a warm southerly breeze.But the fantastic illusion never lasted more than a minute. We were theonly living creatures in this subterranean worldDuring certain periods there was an utter cessation of wind when asilence deeper more terrible than the silence of the desert fell uponthese solitary and arid rocksand seemed to hang like a leaden weightupon the waters of this singular ocean. I sought amid the awfulstillness to penetrate through the distant fog to tear down the veilwhich concealed the mysterious distance. What unspoken words weremurmured by my trembling lipswhat questions did I wish to ask and didnot Where did this sea endto what did it lead Should we ever be ableto examine its distant shoresBut my uncle had no doubts about the matter. He was convinced that ourenterprise would in the end be successful. For my part I was in a stateof painful indecisionI desired to embark on the journey and tosucceed and still I feared the result.After we had passed an hour or more in silent contemplation of thewondrous spectacle we rose and went down towards the bank on our way tothe grotto which I was not sorry to gain. After a slight repast Isought refuge in slumber and at length after many and tediousstruggles sleep came over my weary eyes.CHAPTER LAUNCHING THE RAFTOn the morning of the next day to my great surprise I awoke completelyrestored. I thought a bath would be delightful after my long illness andsufferings. So soon after rising I went and plunged into the waters ofthis new Mediterranean. The bath was cool fresh and invigorating.I came back to breakfast with an excellent appetite. Hans our worthyguide thoroughly understood how to cook such eatables as we were ableto provide he had both fire and water at discretion so that he wasenabled slightly to vary the weary monotony of our ordinary repast.Our morning meal was like a capital English breakfast with coffee byway of a windup. And never had this delicious beverage been so welcomeand refreshing.My uncle had sufficient regard for my state of health not to interruptme in the enjoyment of the meal but he was evidently delighted when Ihad finished.Now then said he come with me. It is the height of the tide and Iam anxious to study its curious phenomena.What I cried rising in astonishment did you say the tide UncleCertainly I did.You do not mean to say I replied in a tone of respectful doubtthat the influence of the sun and moon is felt here below.And pray why not Are not all bodies influenced by the law of universalattraction Why should this vast underground sea be exempt from thegeneral law the rule of the universe Besides there is nothing likethat which is proved and demonstrated. Despite the great atmosphericpressure down here you will notice that this inland sea rises and fallswith as much regularity as the Atlantic itself.As my uncle spoke we reached the sandy shore and saw and heard thewaves breaking monotonously on the beach. They were evidently rising.This is truly the flood I cried looking at the water at my feet.Yes my excellent nephew replied my uncle rubbing his hands with thegusto of a philosopher and you see by these several streaks of foamthat the tide rises at least ten or twelve feet.It is indeed marvelous.By no means he responded on the contrary it is quite natural.It may appear so in your eyes my dear uncle was my reply but allthe phenomena of the place appear to me to partake of the marvelous. Itis almost impossible to believe that which I see. Who in his wildestdreams could have imagined that beneath the crust of our earth therecould exist a real ocean with ebbing and flowing tides with itschanges of winds and even its storms I for one should have laughed thesuggestion to scorn.But Harry my boy why not inquired my uncle with a pitying smileis there any physical reason in opposition to itWell if we give up the great theory of the central heat of the earthI certainly can offer no reasons why anything should be looked upon asimpossible.Then you will own he added that the system of Sir Humphry Davy iswholly justified by what we have seenI allow that it isand that point once granted I certainly can see noreason for doubting the existence of seas and other wonders evencountries in the interior of the globe.That is sobut of course these varied countries are uninhabitedWell I grant that it is more likely than not still I do not see whythis sea should not have given shelter to some species of unknown fish.Hitherto we have not discovered any and the probabilities are ratheragainst our ever doing so observed the Professor.I was losing my skepticism in the presence of these wonders.Well I am determined to solve the question. It is my intention to trymy luck with my fishing line and hook.Certainly make the experiment said my uncle pleased with myenthusiasm. While we are about it it will certainly be only proper todiscover all the secrets of this extraordinary region.But after all where are we now I asked all this time I have quiteforgotten to ask you a question which doubtless your philosophicalinstruments have long since answered.Well replied the Professor examining the situation from only onepoint of view we are now distant three hundred and fifty leagues fromIceland.So much was my exclamation.I have gone over the matter several times and am sure not to have madea mistake of five hundred yards replied my uncle positively.And as to the directionare we still going to the southeastYes with a western declination of nineteen degrees fortytwominutes just as it is above. As for the inclination I havediscovered a very curious fact. The declination is the variation of the needle from the truemeridian of a place. Inclination is the dip of the magnetic needle with a tendency toincline towards the earth.What may that be Uncle Your information interests me.Why that the needle instead of dipping towards the pole as it does onearth in the northern hemisphere has an upward tendency.This proves I cried that the great point of magnetic attractionlies somewhere between the surface of the earth and the spot we havesucceeded in reaching.Exactly my observant nephew exclaimed my uncle elated anddelighted and it is quite probable that if we succeed in gettingtoward the polar regionssomewhere near the seventythird degree oflatitude where Sir James Ross discovered the magnetic pole we shallbehold the needle point directly upward. We have therefore discovered byanalogy that this great centre of attraction is not situated at a verygreat depth.Well said I rather surprised this discovery will astonishexperimental philosophers. It was never suspected.Science great mighty and in the end unerring replied my uncledogmatically science has fallen into many errorserrors which havebeen fortunate and useful rather than otherwise for they have been thesteppingstones to truth.After some further discussion I turned to another matter.Have you any idea of the depth we have reachedWe are now continued the Professor exactly thirtyfiveleaguesabove a hundred milesdown into the interior of the earth.So said I after measuring the distance on the map we are nowbeneath the Scottish Highlands and have over our heads the loftyGrampian Hills.You are quite right said the Professor laughing it sounds veryalarming the weight being heavybut the vault which supports this vastmass of earth and rock is solid and safe the mighty Architect of theUniverse has constructed it of solid materials. Man even in his highestflights of vivid and poetic imagination never thought of such thingsWhat are the finest arches of our bridges what the vaulted roofs of ourcathedrals to that mighty dome above us and beneath which floats anocean with its storms and calms and tidesI admire it all as much as you can Uncle and have no fear that ourgranite sky will fall upon our heads. But now that we have discussedmatters of science and discovery what are your future intentions Areyou not thinking of getting back to the surface of our beautiful earthThis was said more as a feeler than with any hope of success.Go back nephew cried my uncle in a tone of alarm you are notsurely thinking of anything so absurd or cowardly. No my intention isto advance and continue our journey. We have as yet been singularlyfortunate and henceforth I hope we shall be more so.But said I how are we to cross yonder liquid plainIt is not my intention to leap into it head foremost or even to swimacross it like Leander over the Hellespont. But as oceans are afterall only great lakes inasmuch as they are surrounded by land so doesit stand to reason that this central sea is circumscribed by granitesurroundings.Doubtless was my natural reply.Well then do you not think that when once we reach the other end weshall find some means of continuing our journeyProbably but what extent do you allow to this internal oceanWell I should fancy it to extend about forty or fifty leaguesmore orless.But even supposing this approximation to be a correct onewhat thenI asked.My dear boy we have no time for further discussion. We shall embarktomorrow.I looked around with surprise and incredulity. I could see nothing inthe shape of boat or vessel.What I cried we are about to launch out upon an unknown sea andwhere if I may ask is the vessel to carry usWell my dear boy it will not be exactly what you would call a vessel.For the present we must be content with a good and solid raft.A raft I cried incredulously but down here a raft is as impossibleof construction as a vesseland I am at a loss to imagineMy good Harryif you were to listen instead of talking so much youwould hear said my uncle waxing a little impatient.I should hearYescertain knocks with the hammer which Hans is now employing tomake the raft. He has been at work for many hours.Making a raftYes.But where has he found trees suitable for such a constructionHe found the trees all ready to his hand. Come and you shall see ourexcellent guide at work.More and more amazed at what I heard and saw I followed my uncle likeone in a dream.After a walk of about a quarter of an hour I saw Hans at work on theother side of the promontory which formed our natural port. A fewminutes more and I was beside him. To my great surprise on the sandyshore lay a halffinished raft. It was made from beams of a verypeculiar wood and a great number of limbs joints boughs and pieceslay about sufficient to have constructed a fleet of ships and boats.I turned to my uncle silent with astonishment and awe.Where did all this wood come from I cried what wood is itWell there is pinewood fir and the palms of the northern regionsmineralized by the action of the sea he replied sententiously.Can it be possibleYes said the learned Professor what you see is called fossil wood.But then cried I after reflecting for a moment like the lignitesit must be as hard and as heavy as iron and therefore will certainlynot float.Sometimes that is the case. Many of these woods have become trueanthracites but others again like those you see before you have onlyundergone one phase of fossil transformation. But there is no proof likedemonstration added my uncle picking one or two of these preciouswaifs and casting them into the sea.The piece of wood after having disappeared for a moment came to thesurface and floated about with the oscillation produced by wind andtide.Are you convinced said my uncle with a selfsatisfied smile.I am convinced I cried that what I see is incredible.The fact was that my journey into the interior of the earth was rapidlychanging all preconceived notions and day by day preparing me for themarvelous.I should not have been surprised to have seen a fleet of native canoesafloat upon that silent sea.The very next evening thanks to the industry and ability of Hans theraft was finished. It was about ten feet long and five feet wide. Thebeams bound together with stout ropes were solid and firm and oncelaunched by our united efforts the improvised vessel floated tranquillyupon the waters of what the Professor had well named the Central Sea.CHAPTER ON THE WATERSA RAFT VOYAGEOn the thirteenth of August we were up betimes. There was no time to belost. We now had to inaugurate a new kind of locomotion which wouldhave the advantage of being rapid and not fatiguing.A mast made of two pieces of wood fastened together to give additionalstrength a yard made from another one the sail a linen sheet from ourbed. We were fortunately in no want of cordage and the whole on trialappeared solid and seaworthy.At six oclock in the morning when the eager and enthusiastic Professorgave the signal to embark the victuals the luggage all ourinstruments our weapons and a goodly supply of sweet water which wehad collected from springs in the rocks were placed on the raft.Hans had with considerable ingenuity contrived a rudder which enabledhim to guide the floating apparatus with ease. He took the tiller as amatter of course. The worthy man was as good a sailor as he was a guideand duck hunter. I then let go the painter which held us to the shorethe sail was brought to the wind and we made a rapid offing.Our sea voyage had at length commenced and once more we were making fordistant and unknown regions.Just as we were about to leave the little port where the raft had beenconstructed my uncle who was very strong as to geographicnomenclature wanted to give it a name and among others suggestedmine.Well said I before you decide I have another to propose.Well out with it.I should like to call it Gretchen. Port Gretchen will sound very wellon our future map.Well then Port Gretchen let it be said the Professor.And thus it was that the memory of my dear girl was attached to ouradventurous and memorable expedition.When we left the shore the wind was blowing from the northward andeastward. We went directly before the wind at a much greater speed thanmight have been expected from a raft. The dense layers of atmosphere atthat depth had great propelling power and acted upon the sail withconsiderable force.At the end of an hour my uncle who had been taking carefulobservations was enabled to judge of the rapidity with which we moved.It was far beyond anything seen in the upper world.If he said we continue to advance at our present rate we shallhave traveled at least thirty leagues in twentyfour hours. With a mereraft this is an almost incredible velocity.I certainly was surprised and without making any reply went forwardupon the raft. Already the northern shore was fading away on the edge ofthe horizon. The two shores appeared to separate more and more leavinga wide and open space for our departure. Before me I could see nothingbut the vast and apparently limitless seaupon which we floatedtheonly living objects in sight.Huge and dark clouds cast their grey shadows belowshadows which seemedto crush that colorless and sullen water by their weight. Anything moresuggestive of gloom and of regions of nether darkness I never beheld.Silvery rays of electric light reflected here and there upon some smallspots of water brought up luminous sparkles in the long wake of ourcumbrous bark. Presently we were wholly out of sight of land not avestige could be seen nor any indication of where we were going. Sostill and motionless did we seem without any distant point to fix oureyes on that but for the phosphoric light at the wake of the raft Ishould have fancied that we were still and motionless.But I knew that we were advancing at a very rapid rate.About twelve oclock in the day vast collections of seaweed werediscovered surrounding us on all sides. I was aware of the extraordinaryvegetative power of these plants which have been known to creep alongthe bottom of the great ocean and stop the advance of large ships. Butnever were seaweeds ever seen so gigantic and wonderful as those of theCentral Sea. I could well imagine how seen at a distance tossing andheaving on the summit of the billows the long lines of algae have beentaken for living things and thus have been fertile sources of thebelief in sea serpents.Our raft swept past great specimens of fucus or seawrack from three tofour thousand feet in length immense incredibly long looking likesnakes that stretched out far beyond our horizon. It afforded me greatamusement to gaze on their variegated ribbonlike endless lengths. Hourafter hour passed without our coming to the termination of thesefloating weeds. If my astonishment increased my patience was wellnighexhausted.What natural force could possibly have produced such abnormal andextraordinary plants What must have been the aspect of the globeduring the first centuries of its formation when under the combinedaction of heat and humidity the vegetable kingdom occupied its vastsurface to the exclusion of everything elseThese were considerations of neverending interest for the geologist andthe philosopher.All this while we were advancing on our journey and at length nightcame but as I had remarked the evening before the luminous state ofthe atmosphere was in nothing diminished. Whatever was the cause it wasa phenomenon upon the duration of which we could calculate withcertainty.As soon as our supper had been disposed of and some little speculativeconversation indulged in I stretched myself at the foot of the mastand presently went to sleep.Hans remained motionless at the tiller allowing the raft to rise andfall on the waves. The wind being aft and the sail square all he hadto do was to keep his oar in the centre.Ever since we had taken our departure from the newly named PortGretchen my worthy uncle had directed me to keep a regular log of ourdays navigation with instructions to put down even the most minuteparticulars every interesting and curious phenomenon the direction ofthe wind our rate of sailing the distance we went in a word everyincident of our extraordinary voyage.From our log therefore I tell the story of our voyage on the CentralSea.Friday August th. A steady breeze from the northwest. Raftprogressing with extreme rapidity and going perfectly straight. Coaststill dimly visible about thirty leagues to leeward. Nothing to be seenbeyond the horizon in front. The extraordinary intensity of the lightneither increases nor diminishes. It is singularly stationary. Theweather remarkably fine that is to say the clouds have ascended veryhigh and are light and fleecy and surrounded by an atmosphereresembling silver in fusion.Thermometer degrees centigrade.About twelve oclock in the day our guide Hans having prepared andbaited a hook cast his line into the subterranean waters. The bait heused was a small piece of meat by means of which he concealed his hook.Anxious as I was I was for a long time doomed to disappointment. Werethese waters supplied with fish or not That was the important question.Nowas my decided answer. Then there came a sudden and rather hard tug.Hans coolly drew it in and with it a fish which struggled violently toescape.A fish cried my uncle.It is a sturgeon I cried certainly a small sturgeon.The Professor examined the fish carefully noting every characteristicand he did not coincide in my opinion. The fish had a flat head roundbody and the lower extremities covered with bony scales its mouth waswholly without teeth the pectoral fins which were highly developedsprouted direct from the body which properly speaking had no tail. Theanimal certainly belonged to the order in which naturalists class thesturgeon but it differed from that fish in many essential particulars.My uncle after all was not mistaken. After a long and patientexamination he saidThis fish my dear boy belongs to a family which has been extinct forages and of which no trace has ever been found on earth except fossilremains in the Devonian strata.You do not mean to say I cried that we have captured a livespecimen of a fish belonging to the primitive stock that existed beforethe delugeWe have said the Professor who all this time was continuing hisobservations and you may see by careful examination that these fossilfish have no identity with existing species. To hold in ones handtherefore a living specimen of the order is enough to make anaturalist happy for life.But cried I to what family does it belongTo the order of Ganoidesan order of fish having angular scalescovered with bright enamelforming one of the family of theCephalaspides of the genusWell sir I remarked as I noticed my uncle hesitated to conclude.To the genus Pterychtisyes I am certain of it. Still though I amconfident of the correctness of my surmise this fish offers to ournotice a remarkable peculiarity never known to exist in any other fishbut those which are the natives of subterranean waters wells lakes incaverns and suchlike hidden pools.And what may that beIt is blind.Blind I cried much surprised.Not only blind continued the Professor but absolutely withoutorgans of sight.I now examined our discovery for myself. It was singular to be surebut it was really a fact. This however might be a solitary instance Isuggested. The hook was baited again and once more thrown into thewater. This subterranean ocean must have been tolerably well suppliedwith fish for in two hours we took a large number of Pterychtis aswell as other fish belonging to another supposed extinct familytheDipterides a genus of fish furnished with two fins only whence thename though my uncle could not class it exactly. All withoutexception however were blind. This unexpected capture enabled us torenew our stock of provisions in a very satisfactory way.We were now convinced that this subterranean sea contained only fishknown to us as fossil specimensand fish and reptiles alike were allthe more perfect the farther back they dated their origin.We began to hope that we should find some of those saurians whichscience has succeeded in reconstructing from bits of bone or cartilage.I took up the telescope and carefully examined the horizonlooked overthe whole sea it was utterly and entirely deserted. Doubtless we werestill too near the coast.After an examination of the ocean I looked upward towards the strangeand mysterious sky. Why should not one of the birds reconstructed by theimmortal Cuvier flap his stupendous wings aloft in the dull strata ofsubterranean air It would of course find quite sufficient food fromthe fish in the sea. I gazed for some time upon the void above. It wasas silent and as deserted as the shores we had but lately left.Nevertheless though I could neither see nor discover anything myimagination carried me away into wild hypotheses. I was in a kind ofwaking dream. I thought I saw on the surface of the water those enormousantediluvian turtles as big as floating islands. Upon those dull andsomber shores passed a spectral row of the mammifers of early days thegreat Liptotherium found in the cavernous hollow of the Brazilian hillsthe Mesicotherium a native of the glacial regions of Siberia.Farther on the pachydermatous Lophrodon that gigantic tapir whichconcealed itself behind rocks ready to do battle for its prey with theAnoplotherium a singular animal partaking of the nature of therhinoceros the horse the hippopotamus and the camel.There was the giant Mastodon twisting and turning his horrid trunkwith which he crushed the rocks of the shore to powder while theMegatheriumhis back raised like a cat in a passion his enormous clawsstretched out dug into the earth for food at the same time that heawoke the sonorous echoes of the whole place with his terrible roar.Higher up still the first monkey ever seen on the face of the globeclambered gamboling and playing up the granite hills. Still fartheraway ran the Pterodactyl with the winged hand gliding or rathersailing through the dense and compressed air like a huge bat.Above all near the leaden granitic sky were immense birds morepowerful than the cassowary and the ostrich which spread their mightywings and fluttered against the huge stone vault of the inland sea.I thought such was the effect of my imagination that I saw this wholetribe of antediluvian creatures. I carried myself back to far ages longbefore man existedwhen in fact the earth was in too imperfect astate for him to live upon it.My dream was of countless ages before the existence of man. Themammifers first disappeared then the mighty birds then the reptiles ofthe secondary period presently the fish the crustacea the mollusksand finally the vertebrata. The zoophytes of the period of transition intheir turn sank into annihilation.The whole panorama of the worlds life before the historic periodseemed to be born over again and mine was the only human heart thatbeat in this unpeopled world There were no more seasons there were nomore climates the natural heat of the world increased unceasingly andneutralized that of the great radiant Sun.Vegetation was exaggerated in an extraordinary manner. I passed like ashadow in the midst of brushwood as lofty as the giant trees ofCalifornia and trod underfoot the moist and humid soil reeking with arank and varied vegetation.I leaned against the huge columnlike trunks of giant trees to whichthose of Canada were as ferns. Whole ages passed hundreds upon hundredsof years were concentrated into a single day.Next unrolled before me like a panorama came the great and wondrousseries of terrestrial transformations. Plants disappeared the graniticrocks lost all trace of solidity the liquid state was suddenlysubstituted for that which had before existed. This was caused byintense heat acting on the organic matter of the earth. The watersflowed over the whole surface of the globe they boiled they werevolatilized or turned into vapor a kind of steam cloud wrapped thewhole earth the globe itself becoming at last nothing but one hugesphere of gas indescribable in color between white heat and red asbig and as brilliant as the sun.In the very centre of this prodigious mass fourteen hundred thousandtimes as large as our globe I was whirled round in space and broughtinto close conjunction with the planets. My body was subtilized orrather became volatile and commingled in a state of atomic vapor withthe prodigious clouds which rushed forward like a mighty comet intoinfinite spaceWhat an extraordinary dream Where would it finally take me My feverishhand began to write down the marvelous detailsdetails more like theimaginings of a lunatic than anything sober and real. I had during thisperiod of hallucination forgotten everythingthe Professor the guideand the raft on which we were floating. My mind was in a state ofsemioblivion.What is the matter Harry said my uncle suddenly.My eyes which were wide opened like those of a somnambulist were fixedupon him but I did not see him nor could I clearly make out anythingaround me.Take care my boy again cried my uncle you will fall into the sea.As he uttered these words I felt myself seized on the other side by thefirm hand of our devoted guide. Had it not been for the presence of mindof Hans I must infallibly have fallen into the waves and been drowned.Have you gone mad cried my uncle shaking me on the other side.Whatwhat is the matter I said at last coming to myself.Are you ill Henry continued the Professor in an anxious tone.Nono but I have had an extraordinary dream. It however has passedaway. All now seems well I added looking around me with strangelypuzzled eyes.All right said my uncle a beautiful breeze a splendid sea. We aregoing along at a rapid rate and if I am not out in my calculations weshall soon see land. I shall not be sorry to exchange the narrow limitsof our raft for the mysterious strand of the subterranean ocean.As my uncle uttered these words I rose and carefully scanned thehorizon. But the line of water was still confounded with the loweringclouds that hung aloft and in the distance appeared to touch the edgeof the water.CHAPTER TERRIFIC SAURIAN COMBATSaturday August th. The sea still retains its uniform monotony. Thesame leaden hue the same eternal glare from above. No indication ofland being in sight. The horizon appears to retreat before us more andmore as we advance.My head still dull and heavy from the effects of my extraordinarydream which I cannot as yet banish from my mind.The Professor who has not dreamed is however in one of his moroseand unaccountable humors. Spends his time in scanning the horizon atevery point of the compass. His telescope is raised every moment to hiseyes and when he finds nothing to give any clue to our whereabouts heassumes a Napoleonic attitude and walks anxiously.I remarked that my uncle the Professor had a strong tendency to resumehis old impatient character and I could not but make a note of thisdisagreeable circumstance in my journal. I saw clearly that it hadrequired all the influence of my danger and suffering to extract fromhim one scintillation of humane feeling. Now that I was quite recoveredhis original nature had conquered and obtained the upper hand.And after all what had he to be angry and annoyed about now more thanat any other time Was not the journey being accomplished under the mostfavorable circumstances Was not the raft progressing with the mostmarvelous rapidityWhat then could be the matter After one or two preliminary hems Idetermined to inquire.You seem uneasy Uncle said I when for about the hundredth time heput down his telescope and walked up and down muttering to himself.No I am not uneasy he replied in a dry harsh tone by no means.Perhaps I should have said impatient I replied softening the forceof my remark.Enough to make me so I think.And yet we are advancing at a rate seldom attained by a raft Iremarked.What matters that cried my uncle. I am not vexed at the rate we goat but I am annoyed to find the sea so much vaster than I expected.I then recollected that the Professor before our departure hadestimated the length of this subterranean ocean as at most about thirtyleagues. Now we had traveled at least over thrice that distance withoutdiscovering any trace of the distant shore. I began to understand myuncles anger.We are not going down suddenly exclaimed the Professor. We are notprogressing with our great discoveries. All this is utter loss of time.After all I did not come from home to undertake a party of pleasure.This voyage on a raft over a pond annoys and wearies me.He called this adventurous journey a party of pleasure and this greatinland sea a pondBut argued I if we have followed the route indicated by the greatSaknussemm we cannot be going far wrong.That is the question as the great the immortal Shakespeare has it.Are we following the route indicated by that wondrous sage DidSaknussemm ever fall in with this great sheet of water If he did didhe cross it I begin to fear that the rivulet we adopted for a guide hasled us wrong.In any case we can never regret having come thus far. It is worth thewhole journey to have enjoyed this magnificent spectacleit issomething to have seen.I care nothing about seeing nor about magnificent spectacles. I camedown into the interior of the earth with an object and that object Imean to attain. Dont talk to me about admiring scenery or any othersentimental trash.After this I thought it well to hold my tongue and allow the Professorto bite his lips until the blood came without further remark.At six oclock in the evening our matteroffact guide Hans asked forhis weeks salary and receiving his three rixdollars put themcarefully in his pocket. He was perfectly contented and satisfied.Sunday August th. Nothing new to record. The same weather as before.The wind has a slight tendency to freshen up with signs of anapproaching gale. When I awoke my first observation was in regard tothe intensity of the light. I keep on fearing day after day that theextraordinary electric phenomenon should become first obscured and thengo wholly out leaving us in total darkness. Nothing however of thekind occurs. The shadow of the raft its mast and sails is clearlydistinguished on the surface of the water.This wondrous sea is after all infinite in its extent. It must bequite as wide as the Mediterraneanor perhaps even as the greatAtlantic Ocean. Why after all should it not be soMy uncle has on more than one occasion tried deepsea soundings. Hetied the cross of one of our heaviest crowbars to the extremity of acord which he allowed to run out to the extent of two hundred fathoms.We had the greatest difficulty in hoisting in our novel kind of lead.When the crowbar was finally dragged on board Hans called my attentionto some singular marks upon its surface. The piece of iron looked as ifit had been crushed between two very hard substances.I looked at our worthy guide with an inquiring glance.Tander said he.Of course I was at a loss to understand. I turned round towards myuncle absorbed in gloomy reflections. I had little wish to disturb himfrom his reverie. I accordingly turned once more towards our worthyIcelander.Hans very quietly and significantly opened his mouth once or twice asif in the act of biting and in this way made me understand his meaning.Teeth cried I with stupefaction as I examined the bar of iron withmore attention.Yes. There can be no doubt about the matter. The indentations on the barof iron are the marks of teeth What jaws must the owner of such molarsbe possessed of Have we then come upon a monster of unknown specieswhich still exists within the vast waste of watersa monster morevoracious than a shark more terrible and bulky than the whale I amunable to withdraw my eyes from the bar of iron actually half crushedIs then my dream about to come truea dread and terrible realityAll day my thoughts were bent upon these speculations and myimagination scarcely regained a degree of calmness and power ofreflection until after a sleep of many hours.This day as on other Sundays we observed as a day of rest and piousmeditation.Monday August th. I have been trying to realize from memory theparticular instincts of those antediluvian animals of the secondaryperiod which succeeding to the mollusca to the crustacea and to thefish preceded the appearance of the race of mammifers. The generationof reptiles then reigned supreme upon the earth. These hideous monstersruled everything in the seas of the secondary period which formed thestrata of which the Jura mountains are composed. Nature had endowed themwith perfect organization. What a gigantic structure was theirs whatvast and prodigious strength they possessedThe existing saurians which include all such reptiles as lizardscrocodiles and alligators even the largest and most formidable oftheir class are but feeble imitations of their mighty sires theanimals of ages long ago. If there were giants in the days of old therewere also gigantic animals.I shuddered as I evolved from my mind the idea and recollection of theseawful monsters. No eye of man had seen them in the flesh. They tooktheir walks abroad upon the face of the earth thousands of ages beforeman came into existence and their fossil bones discovered in thelimestone have allowed us to reconstruct them anatomically and thus toget some faint idea of their colossal formation.I recollect once seeing in the great Museum of Hamburg the skeleton ofone of these wonderful saurians. It measured no less than thirty feetfrom the nose to the tail. Am I then an inhabitant of the earth of thepresent day destined to find myself face to face with a representativeof this antediluvian family I can scarcely believe it possible I canhardly believe it true. And yet these marks of powerful teeth upon thebar of iron Can there be a doubt from their shape that the bite is thebite of a crocodileMy eyes stare wildly and with terror upon the subterranean sea. Everymoment I expect one of these monsters to rise from its vast cavernousdepths.I fancy that the worthy Professor in some measure shares my notions ifnot my fears for after an attentive examination of the crowbar hecast his eyes rapidly over the mighty and mysterious ocean.What could possess him to leave the land I thought as if the depthof this water was of any importance to us. No doubt he has disturbedsome terrible monster in his watery home and perhaps we may pay dearlyfor our temerity.Anxious to be prepared for the worst I examined our weapons and sawthat they were in a fit state for use. My uncle looked on at me andnodded his head approvingly. He too has noticed what we have to fear.Already the uplifting of the waters on the surface indicates thatsomething is in motion below. The danger approaches. It comes nearer andnearer. It behooves us to be on the watch.Tuesday August th. Evening came at last the hour when the desire forsleep caused our eyelids to be heavy. Night there is not properlyspeaking in this place any more than there is in summer in the arcticregions. Hans however is immovable at the rudder. When he snatches amoment of rest I really cannot say. I take advantage of his vigilance totake some little repose.But two hours after I was awakened from a heavy sleep by an awful shock.The raft appeared to have struck upon a sunken rock. It was lifted rightout of the water by some wondrous and mysterious power and then startedoff twenty fathoms distant.Eh what is it cried my uncle starting up. Are we shipwrecked orwhatHans raised his hand and pointed to where about two hundred yards offa large black mass was moving up and down.I looked with awe. My worst fears were realized.It is a colossal monster I cried clasping my hands.Yes cried the agitated Professor and there yonder is a huge sealizard of terrible size and shape.And farther on behold a prodigious crocodile. Look at his hideous jawsand that row of monstrous teeth. Ha he has gone.A whale a whale shouted the Professor I can see her enormous fins.See see how she blows air and waterTwo liquid columns rose to a vast height above the level of the seainto which they fell with a terrific crash waking up the echoes of thatawful place. We stood stillsurprised stupefied terrorstricken atthe sight of this group of fearful marine monsters more hideous in thereality than in my dream. They were of supernatural dimensions the verysmallest of the whole party could with ease have crushed our raft andourselves with a single bite.Hans seizing the rudder which had flown out of his hand puts it hardaweather in order to escape from such dangerous vicinity but no soonerdoes he do so than he finds he is flying from Scylla to Charybdis. Toleeward is a turtle about forty feet wide and a serpent quite as longwith an enormous and hideous head peering from out the waters.Look which way we will it is impossible for us to fly. The fearfulreptiles advanced upon us they turned and twisted about the raft withawful rapidity. They formed around our devoted vessel a series ofconcentric circles. I took up my rifle in desperation. But what effectcan a rifle ball produce upon the armor scales with which the bodies ofthese horrid monsters are coveredWe remain still and dumb from utter horror. They advance upon us nearerand nearer. Our fate appears certain fearful and terrible. On one sidethe mighty crocodile on the other the great sea serpent. The rest ofthe fearful crowd of marine prodigies have plunged beneath the brinywaves and disappearedI am about to fire at any risk and try the effect of a shot. Hans theguide however interfered by a sign to check me. The two hideous andravenous monsters passed within fifty fathoms of the raft and then madea rush at one anothertheir fury and rage preventing them from seeingus.The combat commenced. We distinctly made out every action of the twohideous monsters.But to my excited imagination the other animals appeared about to takepart in the fierce and deadly strugglethe monster the whale thelizard and the turtle. I distinctly saw them every moment. I pointedthem out to the Icelander. But he only shook his head.Tva he said.Whattwo only does he say. Surely he is mistaken I cried in a toneof wonder.He is quite right replied my uncle coolly and philosophicallyexamining the terrible duel with his telescope and speaking as if hewere in a lecture room.How can that beYes it is so. The first of these hideous monsters has the snout of aporpoise the head of a lizard the teeth of a crocodile and it is thisthat has deceived us. It is the most fearful of all antediluvianreptiles the worldrenowned Ichthyosaurus or great fish lizard.And the otherThe other is a monstrous serpent concealed under the hard vaultedshell of the turtle the terrible enemy of its fearful rival thePlesiosaurus or sea crocodile.Hans was quite right. The two monsters only disturbed the surface ofthe seaAt last have mortal eyes gazed upon two reptiles of the great primitiveocean I see the flaming red eyes of the Ichthyosaurus each as big orbigger than a mans head. Nature in its infinite wisdom had gifted thiswondrous marine animal with an optical apparatus of extreme powercapable of resisting the pressure of the heavy layers of water whichrolled over him in the depths of the ocean where he usually fed. It hasby some authors truly been called the whale of the saurian race for itis as big and quick in its motions as our king of the seas. This onemeasures not less than a hundred feet in length and I can form someidea of his girth when I see him lift his prodigious tail out of thewaters. His jaw is of awful size and strength and according to thebestinformed naturalists it does not contain less than a hundred andeightytwo teeth.The other was the mighty Plesiosaurus a serpent with a cylindricaltrunk with a short stumpy tail with fins like a bank of oars in aRoman galley.Its whole body covered by a carapace or shell and its neck as flexibleas that of a swan rose more than thirty feet above the waves a towerof animated fleshThese animals attacked one another with inconceivable fury. Such acombat was never seen before by mortal eyes and to us who did see itit appeared more like the phantasmagoric creation of a dream thananything else. They raised mountains of water which dashed in sprayover the raft already tossed to and fro by the waves. Twenty times weseemed on the point of being upset and hurled headlong into the waves.Hideous hisses appeared to shake the gloomy granite roof of that mightycavernhisses which carried terror to our hearts. The awful combatantsheld each other in a tight embrace. I could not make out one from theother. Still the combat could not last forever and woe unto uswhichsoever became the victor.One hour two hours three hours passed away without any decisiveresult. The struggle continued with the same deadly tenacity butwithout apparent result. The deadly opponents now approached now drewaway from the raft. Once or twice we fancied they were about to leave usaltogether but instead of that they came nearer and nearer.We crouched on the raft ready to fire at them at a moments notice pooras the prospect of hurting or terrifying them was. Still we weredetermined not to perish without a struggle.Suddenly the Ichthyosaurus and the Plesiosaurus disappeared beneath thewaves leaving behind them a maelstrom in the midst of the sea. We werenearly drawn down by the indraft of the waterSeveral minutes elapsed before anything was again seen. Was thiswonderful combat to end in the depths of the ocean Was the last act ofthis terrible drama to take place without spectatorsIt was impossible for us to say.Suddenly at no great distance from us an enormous mass rises out ofthe watersthe head of the great Plesiosaurus. The terrible monster isnow wounded unto death. I can see nothing now of his enormous body. Allthat could be distinguished was his serpentlike neck which he twistedand curled in all the agonies of death. Now he struck the waters with itas if it had been a gigantic whip and then again wriggled like a wormcut in two. The water was spurted up to a great distance in alldirections. A great portion of it swept over our raft and nearly blindedus. But soon the end of the beast approached nearer and nearer hismovements slackened visibly his contortions almost ceased and at lastthe body of the mighty snake lay an inert dead mass on the surface ofthe now calm and placid waters.As for the Ichthyosaurus has he gone down to his mighty cavern underthe sea to rest or will he reappear to destroy usThis question remained unanswered. And we had breathing time.CHAPTER THE SEA MONSTERWednesday August th. Fortunately the wind which for the presentblows with some violence has allowed us to escape from the scene of theunparalleled and extraordinary struggle. Hans with his usualimperturbable calm remained at the helm. My uncle who for a short timehad been withdrawn from his absorbing reveries by the novel incidents ofthis sea fight fell back again apparently into a brown study. His eyeswere fixed impatiently on the widespread ocean.Our voyage now became monotonous and uniform. Dull as it has become Ihave no desire to have it broken by any repetition of the perils andadventures of yesterday.Thursday August th. The wind is now N. N. E. and blows veryirregularly. It has changed to fitful gusts. The temperature isexceedingly high. We are now progressing at the average rate of aboutten miles and a half per hour.About twelve oclock a distant sound as of thunder fell upon our ears. Imake a note of the fact without even venturing a suggestion as to itscause. It was one continued roar as of a sea falling over mighty rocks.Far off in the distance said the Professor dogmatically there issome rock or some island against which the sea lashed to fury by thewind is breaking violently.Hans without saying a word clambered to the top of the mast but couldmake out nothing. The ocean was level in every direction as far as theeye could reach.Three hours passed away without any sign to indicate what might bebefore us. The sound began to assume that of a mighty cataract.I expressed my opinion on this point strongly to my uncle. He merelyshook his head. I however am strongly impressed by a conviction that Iam not wrong. Are we advancing towards some mighty waterfall which shallcast us into the abyss Probably this mode of descending into the abyssmay be agreeable to the Professor because it would be something likethe vertical descent he is so eager to make. I entertain a verydifferent opinion.Whatever be the truth it is certain that not many leagues distant theremust be some very extraordinary phenomenon for as we advance the roarbecomes something mighty and stupendous. Is it in the water or in theairI cast hasty glances aloft at the suspended vapors and I seek topenetrate their mighty depths. But the vault above is tranquil. Theclouds which are now elevated to the very summit appear utterly stilland motionless and completely lost in the irradiation of electriclight. It is necessary therefore to seek for the cause of thisphenomenon elsewhere.I examine the horizon now perfectly calm pure and free from all haze.Its aspect still remains unchanged. But if this awful noise proceedsfrom a cataractif so to speak in plain English this vast interiorocean is precipitated into a lower basinif these tremendous roars areproduced by the noise of falling waters the current would increase inactivity and its increasing swiftness would give me some idea of theextent of the peril with which we are menaced. I consult the current. Itsimply does not exist there is no such thing. An empty bottle cast intothe water lies to leeward without motion.About four oclock Hans rises clambers up the mast and reaches thetruck itself. From this elevated position his looks are cast around.They take in a vast circumference of the ocean. At last his eyes remainfixed. His face expresses no astonishment but his eyes slightly dilate.He has seen something at last cried my uncle.I think so I replied.Hans came down stood beside us and pointed with his right hand to thesouth.Der nere he said.There replied my uncle.And seizing his telescope he looked at it with great attention forabout a minute which to me appeared an age. I knew not what to think orexpect.Yes yes he cried in a tone of considerable surprise there it is.What I asked.A tremendous spurt of water rising out of the waves.Some other marine monster I cried already alarmed.Perhaps.Then let us steer more to the westward for we know what we have toexpect from antediluvian animals was my eager reply.Go ahead said my uncle.I turned towards Hans. Hans was at the tiller steering with his usualimperturbable calm.Nevertheless if from the distance which separated us from thiscreature a distance which must be estimated at not less than a dozenleagues one could see the column of water spurting from the blowholeof the great animal his dimensions must be something preternatural. Tofly is therefore the course to be suggested by ordinary prudence. Butwe have not come into that part of the world to be prudent. Such is myuncles determination.We accordingly continued to advance. The nearer we come the loftieris the spouting water. What monster can fill himself with such hugevolumes of water and then unceasingly spout them out in such loftyjetsAt eight oclock in the evening reckoning as above ground where thereis day and night we are not more than two leagues from the mightybeast. Its long black enormous mountainous body lies on the top ofthe water like an island. But then sailors have been said to have goneashore on sleeping whales mistaking them for land. Is it illusion oris it fear Its length cannot be less than a thousand fathoms. Whatthen is this cetaceous monster of which no Cuvier ever thoughtIt is quite motionless and presents the appearance of sleep. The seaseems unable to lift him upwards it is rather the waves which break onhis huge and gigantic frame. The waterspout rising to a height of fivehundred feet breaks in spray with a dull sullen roar.We advance like senseless lunatics towards this mighty mass.I honestly confess that I was abjectly afraid. I declared that I wouldgo no farther. I threatened in my terror to cut the sheet of the sail. Iattacked the Professor with considerable acrimony calling himfoolhardy mad I know not what. He made no answer.Suddenly the imperturbable Hans once more pointed his finger to themenacing objectiHolmeiAn island cried my uncle.An island I replied shrugging my shoulders at this poor attempt atdeception.Of course it is cried my uncle bursting into a loud and joyouslaugh.But the waterspoutGeyser said Hans.Yes of coursea geyser replied my uncle still laughing a geyserlike those common in Iceland. Jets like this are the great wonders ofthe country.At first I would not allow that I had been so grossly deceived. Whatcould be more ridiculous than to have taken an island for a marinemonster But kick as one may one must yield to evidence and I wasfinally convinced of my error. It was nothing after all but a naturalphenomenon.As we approached nearer and nearer the dimensions of the liquid sheafof waters became truly grand and stupendous. The island had at adistance presented the appearance of an enormous whale whose head rosehigh above the waters. The geyser a word the Icelanders pronouncegeysir and which signifies fury rose majestically from its summit.Dull detonations are heard every now and then and the enormous jettaken as it were with sudden fury shakes its plume of vapor and boundsinto the first layer of the clouds. It is alone. Neither spurts of vapornor hot springs surround it and the whole volcanic power of that regionis concentrated in one sublime column. The rays of electric light mixwith this dazzling sheaf every drop as it falls assuming the prismaticcolors of the rainbow.Let us go on shore said the Professor after some minutes of silence.It is necessary however to take great precaution in order to avoidthe weight of falling waters which would cause the raft to founder inan instant. Hans however steers admirably and brings us to the otherextremity of the island.I was the first to leap on the rock. My uncle followed while theeiderduck hunter remained still like a man above any childish sourcesof astonishment. We were now walking on granite mixed with siliceoussandstone the soil shivered under our feet like the sides of boilers inwhich overheated steam is forcibly confined. It is burning. We sooncame in sight of the little central basin from which rose the geyser. Iplunged a thermometer into the water which ran bubbling from the centreand it marked a heat of a hundred and sixtythree degreesThis water therefore came from some place where the heat was intense.This was singularly in contradiction with the theories of ProfessorHardwigg. I could not help telling him my opinion on the subject.Well said he sharply and what does this prove against my doctrineNothing replied I dryly seeing that I was running my head against aforegone conclusion.Nevertheless I am compelled to confess that until now we have been mostremarkably fortunate and that this voyage is being accomplished in mostfavorable conditions of temperature but it appears evident in factcertain that we shall sooner or later arrive at one of those regionswhere the central heat will reach its utmost limits and will go farbeyond all the possible gradations of thermometers.Visions of the Hades of the ancients believed to be in the centre ofthe earth floated through my imagination.We shall however see what we shall see. That is the Professorsfavorite phrase now. Having christened the volcanic island by the nameof his nephew the leader of the expedition turned away and gave thesignal for embarkation.I stood still however for some minutes gazing upon the magnificentgeyser. I soon was able to perceive that the upward tendency of thewater was irregular now it diminished in intensity and then suddenlyit regained new vigor which I attributed to the variation of thepressure of the accumulated vapors in its reservoir.At last we took our departure going carefully round the projecting andrather dangerous rocks of the southern side. Hans had taken advantageof this brief halt to repair the raft.Before we took our final departure from the island however I made someobservations to calculate the distance we had gone over and I put themdown in my journal. Since we left Port Gretchen we had traveled twohundred and seventy leaguesmore than eight hundred mileson thisgreat inland sea we were therefore six hundred and twenty leaguesfrom Iceland and exactly under England.CHAPTER THE BATTLE OF THE ELEMENTSFriday August st. This morning the magnificent geyser had whollydisappeared. The wind had freshened up and we were fast leaving theneighborhood of Henrys Island. Even the roaring sound of the mightycolumn was lost to the ear.The weather if under the circumstances we may use such an expressionis about to change very suddenly. The atmosphere is being graduallyloaded with vapors which carry with them the electricity formed by theconstant evaporation of the saline waters the clouds are slowly butsensibly falling towards the sea and are assuming a darkolive texturethe electric rays can scarcely pierce through the opaque curtain whichhas fallen like a drop scene before this wondrous theater on the stageof which another and terrible drama is soon to be enacted. This time itis no fight of animals it is the fearful battle of the elements.I feel that I am very peculiarly influenced as all creatures are onland when a deluge is about to take place.The cumuli a perfectly oval kind of cloud piled upon the southpresented a most awful and sinister appearance with the pitiless aspectoften seen before a storm. The air is extremely heavy the sea iscomparatively calm.In the distance the clouds have assumed the appearance of enormousballs of cotton or rather pods piled one above the other inpicturesque confusion. By degrees they appear to swell out break andgain in number what they lose in grandeur their heaviness is so greatthat they are unable to lift themselves from the horizon but under theinfluence of the upper currents of air they are gradually broken upbecome much darker and then present the appearance of one single layerof a formidable character now and then a lighter cloud still lit upfrom above rebounds upon this grey carpet and is lost in the opaquemass.There can be no doubt that the entire atmosphere is saturated withelectric fluid I am myself wholly impregnated my hairs literally standon end as if under the influence of a galvanic battery. If one of mycompanions ventured to touch me I think he would receive rather aviolent and unpleasant shock.About ten oclock in the morning the symptoms of the storm became morethorough and decisive the wind appeared to soften down as if to takebreath for a renewed attack the vast funereal pall above us looked likea huge baglike the cave of AEolus in which the storm was collectingits forces for the attack.I tried all I could not to believe in the menacing signs of the sky andyet I could not avoid saying as it were involuntarilyI believe we are going to have bad weather.The Professor made me no answer. He was in a horrible in a detestablehumorto see the ocean stretching interminably before his eyes. Onhearing my words he simply shrugged his shoulders.We shall have a tremendous storm I said again pointing to thehorizon. These clouds are falling lower and lower upon the sea as ifto crush it.A great silence prevailed. The wind wholly ceased. Nature assumed a deadcalm and ceased to breathe. Upon the mast where I noticed a sort ofslight ignis fatuus the sail hangs in loose heavy folds. The raft ismotionless in the midst of a dark heavy seawithout undulation withoutmotion. It is as still as glass. But as we are making no progress whatis the use of keeping up the sail which may be the cause of ourperdition if the tempest should suddenly strike us without warning.Let us lower the sail I said it is only an act of common prudence.Nono cried my uncle in an exasperated tone a hundred times no.Let the wind strike us and do its worst let the storm sweep us awaywhere it willonly let me see the glimmer of some coastof some rockycliffs even if they dash our raft into a thousand pieces. No keep upthe sailno matter what happens.These words were scarcely uttered when the southern horizon underwent asudden and violent change. The long accumulated vapors were resolvedinto water and the air required to fill up the void produced became awild and raging tempest.It came from the most distant corners of the mighty cavern. It ragedfrom every point of the compass. It roared it yelled it shrieked withglee as of demons let loose. The darkness increased and became indeeddarkness visible.The raft rose and fell with the storm and bounded over the waves. Myuncle was cast headlong upon the deck. I with great difficulty draggedmyself towards him. He was holding on with might and main to the end ofa cable and appeared to gaze with pleasure and delight at the spectacleof the unchained elements.Hans never moved a muscle. His long hair driven hither and thither bythe tempest and scattered wildly over his motionless face gave him amost extraordinary appearancefor every single hair was illuminated bylittle sparkling sprigs.His countenance presents the extraordinary appearance of an antediluvianman a true contemporary of the Megatherium.Still the mast holds good against the storm. The sail spreads out andfills like a soap bubble about to burst. The raft rushes on at a paceimpossible to estimate but still less swiftly than the body of waterdisplaced beneath it the rapidity of which may be seen by the lineswhich fly right and left in the wake.The sail the sail I cried making a trumpet of my hands and thenendeavoring to lower it.Let it alone said my uncle more exasperated than ever.iNeji said Hans gently shaking his head.Nevertheless the rain formed a roaring cataract before this horizon ofwhich we were in search and to which we were rushing like madmen.But before this wilderness of waters reached us the mighty veil ofcloud was torn in twain the sea began to foam wildly and theelectricity produced by some vast and extraordinary chemical action inthe upper layer of cloud is brought into play. To the fearful claps ofthunder are added dazzling flashes of lightning such as I had neverseen. The flashes crossed one another hurled from every side while thethunder came pealing like an echo. The mass of vapor becomesincandescent the hailstones which strike the metal of our boots and ourweapons are actually luminous the waves as they rise appear to befireeating monsters beneath which seethes an intense fire theircrests surmounted by combs of flame.My eyes are dazzled blinded by the intensity of light my ears aredeafened by the awful roar of the elements. I am compelled to hold ontothe mast which bends like a reed beneath the violence of the storm towhich none ever before seen by mariners bore any resemblance. Here my traveling notes become very incomplete loose and vague. I haveonly been able to make out one or two fugitive observations jotted downin a mere mechanical way. But even their brevity even their obscurityshow the emotions which overcame me. Sunday August rd. Where have we got to In what region are wewandering We are still carried forward with inconceivable rapidity.The night has been fearful something not to be described. The stormshows no signs of cessation. We exist in the midst of an uproar whichhas no name. The detonations as of artillery are incessant. Our earsliterally bleed. We are unable to exchange a word or hear each otherspeak.The lightning never ceases to flash for a single instant. I can see thezigzags after a rapid dart strike the arched roof of this mightiest ofmighty vaults. If it were to give way and fall upon us Other lightningsplunge their forked streaks in every direction and take the form ofglobes of fire which explode like bombshells over a beleaguered city.The general crash and roar do not apparently increase it has alreadygone far beyond what human ear can appreciate. If all the powdermagazines in the world were to explode together it would be impossiblefor us to hear worse noise.There is a constant emission of light from the storm clouds theelectric matter is incessantly released evidently the gaseousprinciples of the air are out of order innumerable columns of waterrush up like waterspouts and fall back upon the surface of the ocean infoam.Whither are we going My uncle still lies at full length upon the raftwithout speakingwithout taking any note of time.The heat increases. I look at the thermometer to my surprise itindicatesiThe exact figure is here rubbed out in my manuscript.iMonday August th. This terrible storm will never end. Why should notthis state of the atmosphere so dense and murky once modified againremain definitiveWe are utterly broken and harassed by fatigue. Hans remains just asusual. The raft runs to the southeast invariably. We have now alreadyrun two hundred leagues from the newly discovered island.About twelve oclock the storm became worse than ever. We are obligednow to fasten every bit of cargo tightly on the deck of the raft oreverything would be swept away. We make ourselves fast too each manlashing the other. The waves drive over us so that several times we areactually under water.We had been under the painful necessity of abstaining from speech forthree days and three nights. We opened our mouths we moved our lipsbut no sound came. Even when we placed our mouths to each others earsit was the same.The wind carried the voice away.My uncle once contrived to get his head close to mine after severalalmost vain endeavors. He appeared to my nearly exhausted senses toarticulate some word. I had a notion more from intuition than anythingelse that he said to me We are lost.I took out my notebook from which under the most desperatecircumstances I never parted and wrote a few words as legibly as IcouldTake in sail.With a deep sigh he nodded his head and acquiesced.His head had scarcely time to fall back in the position from which hehad momentarily raised it than a disk or ball of fire appeared on thevery edge of the raftour devoted our doomed craft. The mast and sailare carried away bodily and I see them swept away to a prodigiousheight like a kite.We were frozen actually shivered with terror. The ball of fire halfwhite half azurecolored about the size of a teninch bombshell movedalong turning with prodigious rapidity to leeward of the storm. It ranabout here there and everywhere it clambered up one of the bulwarksof the raft it leaped upon the sack of provisions and then finallydescended lightly fell like a football and landed on our powder barrel.Horrible situation. An explosion of course was now inevitable.By heavens mercy it was not so.The dazzling disk moved on one side it approached Hans who looked atit with singular fixity then it approached my uncle who cast himselfon his knees to avoid it it came towards me as I stood pale andshuddering in the dazzling light and heat it pirouetted round my feetwhich I endeavored to withdraw.An odor of nitrous gas filled the whole air it penetrated to thethroat to the lungs. I felt ready to choke.Why is it that I cannot withdraw my feet Are they riveted to theflooring of the raftNo.The fall of the electric globe has turned all the iron on board intoloadstonesthe instruments the tools the arms are clanging togetherwith awful and horrible noise the nails of my heavy boots adhereclosely to the plate of iron incrustated in the wood. I cannot withdrawmy foot.It is the old story again of the mountain of adamant.At last by a violent and almost superhuman effort I tear it away justas the ball which is still executing its gyratory motions is about torun round it and drag me with itifOh what intense stupendous light The globe of fire burstswe areenveloped in cascades of living fire which flood the space around withluminous matter.Then all went out and darkness once more fell upon the deep I had justtime to see my uncle once more cast apparently senseless on the flooringof the raft Hans at the helm spitting fire under the influence ofthe electricity which seemed to have gone through him.Whither are we going I ask and echo answers Whither.............Tuesday August th. I have just come out of a long fainting fit. Theawful and hideous storm still continues the lightning has increased invividness and pours out its fiery wrath like a brood of serpents letloose in the atmosphere.Are we still upon the sea Yes and being carried along with incrediblevelocity.We have passed under England under the Channel under France probablyunder the whole extent of Europe. Another awful clamor in the distance. This time it is certain that thesea is breaking upon the rocks at no great distance. Then............................CHAPTER OUR ROUTE REVERSEDHere ends what I call My Journal of our voyage on board the raftwhich journal was happily saved from the wreck. I proceed with mynarrative as I did before I commenced my daily notes.What happened when the terrible shock took place when the raft was castupon the rocky shore it would be impossible for me now to say. I feltmyself precipitated violently into the boiling waves and if I escapedfrom a certain and cruel death it was wholly owing to the determinationof the faithful Hans who clutching me by the arm saved me from theyawning abyss.The courageous Icelander then carried me in his powerful arms far outof the reach of the waves and laid me down upon a burning expanse ofsand where I found myself some time afterwards in the company of myuncle the Professor.Then he quietly returned towards the fatal rocks against which thefurious waves were beating in order to save any stray waifs from thewreck. This man was always practical and thoughtful. I could not utter aword I was quite overcome with emotion my whole body was broken andbruised with fatigue it took hours before I was anything like myself.Meanwhile there fell a fearful deluge of rain drenching us to theskin. Its very violence however proclaimed the approaching end of thestorm. Some overhanging rocks afforded us a slight protection from thetorrents.Under this shelter Hans prepared some food which however I wasunable to touch and exhausted by the three weary days and nights ofwatching we fell into a deep and painful sleep. My dreams were fearfulbut at last exhausted nature asserted her supremacy and I slumbered.Next day when I awoke the change was magical. The weather wasmagnificent. Air and sea as if by mutual consent had regained theirserenity. Every trace of the storm even the faintest had disappeared.I was saluted on my awakening by the first joyous tones I had heard fromthe Professor for many a day. His gaiety indeed was somethingterrible.Well my lad he cried rubbing his hands together have you sleptsoundlyMight it not have been supposed that we were in the old house on theKonigstrasse that I had just come down quietly to my breakfast andthat my marriage with Gretchen was to take place that very day Myuncles coolness was exasperating.Alas considering how the tempest had driven us in an easterlydirection we had passed under the whole of Germany under the city ofHamburg where I had been so happy under the very street which containedall I loved and cared for in the world.It was a positive fact that I was only separated from her by a distanceof forty leagues. But these forty leagues were of hard impenetrablegraniteAll these dreary and miserable reflections passed through my mindbefore I attempted to answer my uncles question.Why what is the matter he cried. Cannot you say whether you haveslept well or notI have slept very well was my reply but every bone in my bodyaches. I suppose that will lead to nothing.Nothing at all my boy. It is only the result of the fatigue of thelast few daysthat is all.You appearif I may be allowed to say soto be very jolly thismorning I said.Delighted my dear boy delighted. Was never happier in my life. Wehave at last reached the wishedfor port.The end of our expedition cried I in a tone of considerablesurprise.No but to the confines of that sea which I began to fear would neverend but go round the whole world. We will now tranquilly resume ourjourney by land and once again endeavor to dive into the centre of theearth.My dear uncle I began in a hesitating kind of way allow me to askyou one question.Certainly Harry a dozen if you think proper.One will suffice. How about getting back I asked.How about getting back What a question to ask. We have not as yetreached the end of our journey.I know that. All I want to know is how you propose we shall manage thereturn voyageIn the most simple manner in the world said the imperturbableProfessor. Once we reach the exact centre of this sphere either weshall find a new road by which to ascend to the surface or we shallsimply turn round and go back by the way we came. I have every reason tobelieve that while we are traveling forward it will not close behindus.Then one of the first matters to see to will be to repair the raftwas my rather melancholy response.Of course. We must attend to that above all things continued theProfessor.Then comes the allimportant question of provisions I urged. Have weanything like enough left to enable us to accomplish such great suchamazing designs as you contemplate carrying outI have seen into the matter and my answer is in the affirmative. Hansis a very clever fellow and I have reason to believe that he has savedthe greater part of the cargo. But the best way to satisfy your scruplesis to come and judge for yourself.Saying which he led the way out of the kind of open grotto in which wehad taken shelter. I had almost begun to hope that which I should ratherhave feared and this was the impossibility of such a shipwreck leavingeven the slightest signs of what it had carried as freight. I washowever thoroughly mistaken.As soon as I reached the shores of this inland sea I found Hansstanding gravely in the midst of a large number of things laid out incomplete order. My uncle wrung his hands with deep and silent gratitude.His heart was too full for speech.This man whose superhuman devotion to his employers I not only neversaw surpassed nor even equaled had been hard at work all the time weslept and at the risk of his life had succeeded in saving the mostprecious articles of our cargo.Of course under the circumstances we necessarily experienced severalsevere losses. Our weapons had wholly vanished. But experience hadtaught us to do without them. The provision of powder had howeverremained intact after having narrowly escaped blowing us all to atomsin the storm.Well said the Professor who was now ready to make the best ofeverything as we have no guns all we have to do is to give up allidea of hunting.Yes my dear sir we can do without them but what about all ourinstrumentsHere is the manometer the most useful of all and which I gladlyaccept in lieu of the rest. With it alone I can calculate the depth aswe proceed by its means alone I shall be able to decide when we havereached the centre of the earth. Ha ha but for this little instrumentwe might make a mistake and run the risk of coming out at theantipodesAll this was said amid bursts of unnatural laughter.But the compass I cried without that what can we doHere it is safe and sound he cried with real joy ah ah and herewe have the chronometer and the thermometers. Hans the hunter is indeedan invaluable manIt was impossible to deny this fact. As far as the nautical and otherinstruments were concerned nothing was wanting. Then on furtherexamination I found ladders cords pickaxes crowbars and shovelsall scattered about on the shore.There was however finally the most important question of all and thatwas provisions.But what are we to do for food I asked.Let us see to the commissariat department replied my uncle gravely.The boxes which contained our supply of food for the voyage were placedin a row along the strand and were in a capital state of preservationthe sea had in every case respected their contents and to sum up in onesentence taking into consideration biscuits salt meat Schiedam anddried fish we could still calculate on having about four monthssupply if used with prudence and caution.Four months cried the sanguine Professor in high glee. Then we shallhave plenty of time both to go and to come and with what remains Iundertake to give a grand dinner to my colleagues of the Johanneum.I sighed. I should by this time have become used to the temperament ofmy uncle and yet this man astonished me more and more every day. He wasthe greatest human enigma I ever had known.Now he before we do anything else we must lay in a stock of freshwater. The rain has fallen in abundance and filled the hollows of thegranite. There is a rich supply of water and we have no fear ofsuffering from thirst which in our circumstances is of the lastimportance. As for the raft I shall recommend Hans to repair it to thebest of his abilities though I have every reason to believe we shallnot require it again.How is that I cried more amazed than ever at my uncles style ofreasoning.I have an idea my dear boy it is none other than this simple fact weshall not come out by the same opening as that by which we entered.I began to look at my uncle with vague suspicion. An idea had more thanonce taken possession of me and this was that he was going mad. Andyet little did I think how true and prophetic his words were doomed tobe.And now he said having seen to all these matters of detail tobreakfast.I followed him to a sort of projecting cape after he had given his lastinstructions to our guide. In this original position with dried meatbiscuit and a delicious cup of tea we made a satisfactory mealI maysay one of the most welcome and pleasant I ever remember. Exhaustionthe keen atmosphere the state of calm after so much agitation allcontributed to give me an excellent appetite. Indeed it contributedvery much to producing a pleasant and cheerful state of mind.While breakfast was in hand and between the sips of warm tea I askedmy uncle if he had any idea of how we now stood in relation to the worldabove.For my part I added I think it will be rather difficult todetermine.Well if we were compelled to fix the exact spot said my uncle itmight be difficult since during the three days of that awful tempest Icould keep no account either of the quickness of our pace or of thedirection in which the raft was going. Still we will endeavor toapproximate to the truth. We shall not I believe be so very far out.Well if I recollect rightly I replied our last observation wasmade at the geyser island.Harrys Island my boy Harrys Island. Do not decline the honor ofhaving named it given your name to an island discovered by us thefirst human beings who trod it since the creation of the worldLet it be so then. At Harrys Island we had already gone over twohundred and seventy leagues of sea and we were I believe about sixhundred leagues more or less from Iceland.Good. I am glad to see that you remember so well. Let us start fromthat point and let us count four days of storm during which our rateof traveling must have been very great. I should say that our velocitymust have been about eighty leagues to the twentyfour hours.I agreed that I thought this a fair calculation. There were then threehundred leagues to be added to the grand total.Yes and the Central Sea must extend at least six hundred leagues fromside to side. Do you know my boy Harry that we have discovered aninland lake larger than the MediterraneanCertainly and we only know of its extent in one way. It may behundreds of miles in length.Very likely.Then said I after calculating for some for some minutes if yourprevisions are right we are at this moment exactly under theMediterranean itself.Do you think soYes I am almost certain of it. Are we not nine hundred leagues distantfrom ReykjavikThat is perfectly true and a famous bit of road we have traveled myboy. But why we should be under the Mediterranean more than under Turkeyor the Atlantic Ocean can only be known when we are sure of not havingdeviated from our course and of this we know nothing.I do not think we were driven very far from our course the windappears to me to have been always about the same. My opinion is thatthis shore must be situated to the southeast of Port Gretchen.GoodI hope so. It will however be easy to decide the matter bytaking the bearings from our departure by means of the compass. Comealong and we will consult that invaluable invention.The Professor now walked eagerly in the direction of the rock where theindefatigable Hans had placed the instruments in safety. My uncle wasgay and lighthearted he rubbed his hands and assumed all sorts ofattitudes. He was to all appearance once more a young man. Since I hadknown him never had he been so amiable and pleasant. I followed himrather curious to know whether I had made any mistake in my estimationof our position.As soon as we had reached the rock my uncle took the compass placed ithorizontally before him and looked keenly at the needle.As he had at first shaken it to give it vivacity it oscillatedconsiderably and then slowly assumed its right position under theinfluence of the magnetic power.The Professor bent his eyes curiously over the wondrous instrument. Aviolent start immediately showed the extent of his emotion.He closed his eyes rubbed them and took another and a keener survey.Then he turned slowly round to me stupefaction depicted on hiscountenance.What is the matter said I beginning to be alarmed.He could not speak. He was too overwhelmed for words. He simply pointedto the instrument.I examined it eagerly according to his mute directions and a loud cryof surprise escaped my lips. The needle of the compass pointed duenorthin the direction we expected was the southIt pointed to the shore instead of to the high seas.I shook the compass I examined it with a curious and anxious eye. Itwas in a state of perfection. No blemish in any way explained thephenomenon. Whatever position we forced the needle into it returnedinvariably to the same unexpected point.It was useless attempting to conceal from ourselves the fatal truth.There could be no doubt about it unwelcome as was the fact that duringthe tempest there had been a sudden slant of wind of which we had beenunable to take any account and thus the raft had carried us back to theshores we had left apparently forever so many days beforeCHAPTER A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERYIt would be altogether impossible for me to give any idea of the utterastonishment which overcame the Professor on making this extraordinarydiscovery. Amazement incredulity and rage were blended in such a wayas to alarm me.During the whole course of my Life I had never seen a man at first sochapfallen and then so furiously indignant.The terrible fatigues of our sea voyage the fearful dangers we hadpassed through had all all gone for nothing. We had to begin them allover again.Instead of progressing as we fondly expected during a voyage of somany days we had retreated. Every hour of our expedition on the rafthad been so much lost timePresently however the indomitable energy of my uncle overcame everyother consideration.So he said between his set teeth fatality will play me theseterrible tricks. The elements themselves conspire to overwhelm me withmortification. Air fire and water combine their united efforts tooppose my passage. Well they shall see what the earnest will of adetermined man can do. I will not yield I will not retreat even oneinch and we shall see who shall triumph in this great contestman ornature.Standing upright on a rock irritated and menacing Professor Hardwigglike the ferocious Ajax seemed to defy the fates. I however took uponmyself to interfere and to impose some sort of check upon suchinsensate enthusiasm.Listen to me Uncle I said in a firm but temperate tone of voicethere must be some limit to ambition here below. It is utterly uselessto struggle against the impossible. Pray listen to reason. We areutterly unprepared for a sea voyage it is simply madness to think ofperforming a journey of five hundred leagues upon a wretched pile ofbeams with a counterpane for a sail a paltry stick for a mast and atempest to contend with. As we are totally incapable of steering ourfrail craft we shall become the mere plaything of the storm and it isacting the part of madmen if we a second time run any risk upon thisdangerous and treacherous Central Sea.These are only a few of the reasons and arguments I puttogetherreasons and arguments which to me appeared unanswerable. I wasallowed to go on without interruption for about ten minutes. Theexplanation to this I soon discovered. The Professor was not evenlistening and did not hear a word of all my eloquence.To the raft he cried in a hoarse voice when I paused for a reply.Such was the result of my strenuous effort to resist his iron will. Itried again I begged and implored him I got into a passion but I hadto deal with a will more determined than my own. I seemed to feel likethe waves which fought and battled against the huge mass of granite atour feet which had smiled grimly for so many ages at their punyefforts.Hans meanwhile without taking part in our discussion had beenrepairing the raft. One would have supposed that he instinctivelyguessed at the further projects of my uncle.By means of some fragments of cordage he had again made the raftseaworthy.While I had been speaking he had hoisted a new mast and sail thelatter already fluttering and waving in the breeze.The worthy Professor spoke a few words to our imperturbable guide whoimmediately began to put our baggage on board and to prepare for ourdeparture. The atmosphere was now tolerably clear and pure and thenortheast wind blew steadily and serenely. It appeared likely to lastfor some time.What then could I do Could I undertake to resist the iron will of twomen It was simply impossible if even I could have hoped for the supportof Hans. This however was out of the question. It appeared to me thatthe Icelander had set aside all personal will and identity. He was apicture of abnegation.I could hope for nothing from one so infatuated with and devoted to hismaster. All I could do therefore was to swim with the stream.In a mood of stolid and sullen resignation I was about to take myaccustomed place on the raft when my uncle placed his hand upon myshoulder.There is no hurry my boy he said we shall not start untiltomorrow.I looked the picture of resignation to the dire will of fate.Under the circumstances he said I ought to neglect no precautions.As fate has cast me upon these shores I shall not leave without havingcompletely examined them.In order to understand this remark I must explain that though we hadbeen driven back to the northern shore we had landed at a verydifferent spot from that which had been our starting point.Port Gretchen must we calculated be very much to the westward.Nothing therefore was more natural and reasonable than that we shouldreconnoiter this new shore upon which we had so unexpectedly landed.Let us go on a journey of discovery I cried.And leaving Hans to his important operation we started on ourexpedition. The distance between the foreshore at high water and thefoot of the rocks was considerable. It would take about half an hourswalking to get from one to the other.As we trudged along our feet crushed innumerable shells of every shapeand sizeonce the dwelling place of animals of every period ofcreation.I particularly noticed some enormous shellscarapaces turtle andtortoise species the diameter of which exceeded fifteen feet.They had in past ages belonged to those gigantic Glyptodons of thePliocene period of which the modern turtle is but a minute specimen. Inaddition the whole soil was covered by a vast quantity of stony relicshaving the appearance of flints worn by the action of the waves andlying in successive layers one above the other. I came to the conclusionthat in past ages the sea must have covered the whole district. Upon thescattered rocks now lying far beyond its reach the mighty waves ofages had left evident marks of their passage.On reflection this appeared to me partially to explain the existence ofthis remarkable ocean forty leagues below the surface of the earthscrust. According to my new and perhaps fanciful theory this liquidmass must be gradually lost in the deep bowels of the earth. I had alsono doubt that this mysterious sea was fed by infiltration of the oceanabove through imperceptible fissures.Nevertheless it was impossible not to admit that these fissures mustnow be nearly choked up for if not the cavern or rather the immenseand stupendous reservoir would have been completely filled in a shortspace of time. Perhaps even this water having to contend against theaccumulated subterraneous fires of the interior of the earth had becomepartially vaporized. Hence the explanation of those heavy cloudssuspended over our heads and the superabundant display of thatelectricity which occasioned such terrible storms in this deep andcavernous sea.This lucid explanation of the phenomena we had witnessed appeared to mequite satisfactory. However great and mighty the marvels of nature mayseem to us they are always to be explained by physical reasons.Everything is subordinate to some great law of nature.It now appeared clear that we were walking upon a kind of sedimentarysoil formed like all the soils of that period so frequent on thesurface of the globe by the subsidence of the waters. The Professorwho was now in his element carefully examined every rocky fissure. Lethim only find an opening and it directly became important to him toexamine its depth.For a whole mile we followed the windings of the Central Sea whensuddenly an important change took place in the aspect of the soil. Itseemed to have been rudely cast up convulsionized as it were by aviolent upheaving of the lower strata. In many places hollows here andhillocks there attested great dislocations at some other period of theterrestrial mass.We advanced with great difficulty over the broken masses of granitemixed with flint quartz and alluvial deposits when a large fieldmore even than a field a plain of bones appeared suddenly before oureyes It looked like an immense cemetery where generation aftergeneration had mingled their mortal dust.Lofty barrows of early remains rose at intervals. They undulated away tothe limits of the distant horizon and were lost in a thick and brownfog.On that spot some three square miles in extent was accumulated thewhole history of animal lifescarcely one creature upon thecomparatively modern soil of the upper and inhabited world had not thereexisted.Nevertheless we were drawn forward by an allabsorbing and impatientcuriosity. Our feet crushed with a dry and crackling sound the remainsof those prehistoric fossils for which the museums of great citiesquarrel even when they obtain only rare and curious morsels. A thousandsuch naturalists as Cuvier would not have sufficed to recompose theskeletons of the organic beings which lay in this magnificent osseouscollection.I was utterly confounded. My uncle stood for some minutes with his armsraised on high towards the thick granite vault which served us for asky. His mouth was wide open his eyes sparkled wildly behind hisspectacles which he had fortunately saved his head bobbed up and downand from side to side while his whole attitude and mien expressedunbounded astonishment.He stood in the presence of an endless wondrous and inexhaustibly richcollection of antediluvian monsters piled up for his own private andpeculiar satisfaction.Fancy an enthusiastic lover of books carried suddenly into the verymidst of the famous library of Alexandria burned by the sacrilegiousOmar and which some miracle had restored to its pristine splendor Suchwas something of the state of mind in which Uncle Hardwigg was nowplaced.For some time he stood thus literally aghast at the magnitude of hisdiscovery.But it was even a greater excitement when darting wildly over this massof organic dust he caught up a naked skull and addressed me in aquivering voiceHarry my boyHarrythis is a human headA human head Uncle I said no less amazed and stupefied thanhimself.Yes nephew. Ah Mr. MilneEdwardsah Mr. De Quatrefageswhy are younot here where I amI Professor HardwiggCHAPTER DISCOVERY UPON DISCOVERYIn order fully to understand the exclamation made by my uncle and hisallusions to these illustrious and learned men it will be necessary toenter into certain explanations in regard to a circumstance of thehighest importance to paleontology or the science of fossil life whichhad taken place a short time before our departure from the upper regionsof the earth.On the th of March some navigators under the direction of M.Boucher de Perthes were at work in the great quarries ofMoulinQuignon near Abbeville in the department of the Somme inFrance. While at work they unexpectedly came upon a human jawboneburied fourteen feet below the surface of the soil. It was the firstfossil of the kind that had ever been brought to the light of day. Nearthis unexpected human relic were found stone hatchets and carved flintscolored and clothed by time in one uniform brilliant tint of verdigris.The report of this extraordinary and unexpected discovery spread notonly all over France but over England and Germany. Many learned menbelonging to various scientific bodies and noteworthy among othersMessrs. MilneEdwards and De Quatrefages took the affair very much toheart demonstrated the incontestable authenticity of the bone inquestion and becameto use the phrase then recognized in Englandthemost ardent supporters of the jawbone question.To the eminent geologists of the United Kingdom who looked upon the factas certainMessrs. Falconer Buck Carpenter and otherswere soonunited the learned men of Germany and among those in the first rankthe most eager the most enthusiastic was my worthy uncle ProfessorHardwigg.The authenticity of a human fossil of the Quaternary period seemed thento be incontestably demonstrated and even to be admitted by the mostskeptical.This system or theory call it what you will had it is true a bitteradversary in M. Elie de Beaumont. This learned man who holds such ahigh place in the scientific world holds that the soil ofMoulinQuignon does not belong to the diluvium but to a much lessancient stratum and in accordance with Cuvier in this respect hewould by no means admit that the human species was contemporary with theanimals of the Quaternary epoch. My worthy uncle Professor Hardwigg inconcert with the great majority of geologists had held firm haddisputed discussed and finally after considerable talking andwriting M. Elie de Beaumont had been pretty well left alone in hisopinions.We were familiar with all the details of this discussion but were farfrom being aware then that since our departure the matter had enteredupon a new phase. Other similar jawbones though belonging toindividuals of varied types and very different natures had been foundin the movable grey sands of certain grottoes in France Switzerlandand Belgium together with arms utensils tools bones of children ofmen in the prime of life and of old men. The existence of men in theQuaternary period became therefore more positive every day.But this was far from being all. New remains dug up from the Plioceneor Tertiary deposits had enabled the more farseeing or audacious amonglearned men to assign even a far greater degree of antiquity to thehuman race. These remains it is true were not those of men that iswere not the bones of men but objects decidedly having served the humanrace shinbones thighbones of fossil animals regularly scooped outand in fact sculpturedbearing the unmistakable signs of humanhandiwork.By means of these wondrous and unexpected discoveries man ascendedendless centuries in the scale of time he in fact preceded themastodon became the contemporary of the iElephas meridionalisithesouthern elephant acquired an antiquity of over a hundred thousandyears since that is the date given by the most eminent geologists tothe Pliocene period of the earth. Such was then the state ofpaleontologic science and what we moreover knew sufficed to explain ourattitude before this great cemetery of the plains of the Hardwigg Ocean.It will now be easy to understand the Professors mingled astonishmentand joy when on advancing about twenty yards he found himself in thepresence of I may say face to face with a specimen of the human raceactually belonging to the Quaternary periodIt was indeed a human skull perfectly recognizable. Had a soil of verypeculiar nature like that of the cemetery of St. Michel at Bordeauxpreserved it during countless ages This was the question I askedmyself but which I was wholly unable to answer. But this head withstretched and parchmenty skin with the teeth whole the hair abundantwas before our eyes as in lifeI stood mute almost paralyzed with wonder and awe before this dreadapparition of another age. My uncle who on almost every occasion was agreat talker remained for a time completely dumfounded. He was too fullof emotion for speech to be possible. After a while however we raisedup the body to which the skull belonged. We stood it on end. It seemedto our excited imaginations to look at us with its terrible holloweyes.After some minutes of silence the man was vanquished by the Professor.Human instincts succumbed to scientific pride and exultation. ProfessorHardwigg carried away by his enthusiasm forgot all the circumstancesof our journey the extraordinary position in which we were placed theimmense cavern which stretched far away over our heads. There can be nodoubt that he thought himself at the Institution addressing hisattentive pupils for he put on his most doctorial style waved hishand and beganGentlemen I have the honor on this auspicious occasion to present toyou a man of the Quaternary period of our globe. Many learned men havedenied his very existence while other able persons perhaps of evenhigher authority have affirmed their belief in the reality of his life.If the St. Thomases of paleontology were present they wouldreverentially touch him with their fingers and believe in his existencethus acknowledging their obstinate heresy. I know that science should becareful in relation to all discoveries of this nature. I am not withouthaving heard of the many Barnums and other quacks who have made a tradeof suchlike pretended discoveries. I have of course heard of thediscovery of the kneebones of Ajax of the pretended finding of the bodyof Orestes by the Spartiates and of the body of Asterius ten spanslong fifteen feetof which we read in Pausanias.I have read everything in relation to the skeleton of Trapanidiscovered in the fourteenth century and which many persons chose toregard as that of Polyphemus and the history of the giant dug up duringthe sixteenth century in the environs of Palmyra. You are well aware asI am gentlemen of the existence of the celebrated analysis made nearLucerne in of the great bones which the celebrated Doctor FelixPlater declared belonged to a giant about nineteen feet high. I havedevoured all the treatises of Cassanion and all those memoirspamphlets speeches and replies published in reference to the skeletonof Teutobochus king of the Cimbri the invader of Gaul dug out of agravel pit in Dauphine in . In the eighteenth century I should havedenied with Peter Campet the existence of the preadamites ofScheuchzer. I have had in my hands the writing called GigansHere my uncle was afflicted by the natural infirmity which prevented himfrom pronouncing difficult words in public. It was not exactlystuttering but a strange sort of constitutional hesitation.The writing named Gigans he repeated.He however could get no further.GiganteoImpossible The unfortunate word would not come out. There would havebeen great laughter at the Institution had the mistake happened there.Gigantosteology at last exclaimed Professor Hardwigg between twosavage growls.Having got over our difficulty and getting more and more excitedYes gentlemen I am well acquainted with all these matters and knowalso that Cuvier and Blumenbach fully recognized in these bones theundeniable remains of mammoths of the Quaternary period. But after whatwe now see to allow a doubt is to insult scientific inquiry. There isthe body you can see it you can touch it. It is not a skeleton it isa complete and uninjured body preserved with an anthropologicalobject.I did not attempt to controvert this singular and astounding assertion.If I could but wash this corpse in a solution of sulphuric acidcontinued my uncle I would undertake to remove all the earthyparticles and these resplendent shells which are incrusted all overthis body. But I am without this precious dissolving medium.Nevertheless such as it is this body will tell its own history.Here the Professor held up the fossil body and exhibited it with raredexterity. No professional showman could have shown more activity.As on examination you will see my uncle continued it is only aboutsix feet in length which is a long way from the pretended giants ofearly days. As to the particular race to which it belonged it isincontestably Caucasian. It is of the white race that is of our own.The skull of this fossil being is a perfect ovoid without any remarkableor prominent development of the cheekbones and without any projectionof the jaw. It presents no indication of the prognathism which modifiesthe facial angle. Measure the angle for yourselves and you will findthat it is just ninety degrees. But I will advance still farther on theroad of inquiry and deduction and I dare venture to say that this humansample or specimen belongs to the Japhetic family which spread over theworld from India to the uttermost limits of western Europe. There is nooccasion gentlemen to smile at my remarks. The facial angle is formed by two planesone more or less verticalwhich is in a straight line with the forehead and the incisors theother horizontal which passes through the organs of hearing and thelower nasal bone. Prognathism in anthropological language means thatparticular projection of the jaw which modifies the facial angle.Of course nobody smiled. But the excellent Professor was so accustomedto beaming countenances at his lectures that he believed he saw all hisaudience laughing during the delivery of his learned dissertation.Yes he continued with renewed animation this is a fossil man acontemporary of the mastodons with the bones of which this wholeamphitheater is covered. But if I am called on to explain how he came tothis place how these various strata by which he is covered have falleninto this vast cavity I can undertake to give you no explanation.Doubtless if we carry ourselves back to the Quaternary epoch we shallfind that great and mighty convulsions took place in the crust of theearth the continually cooling operation through which the earth had topass produced fissures landslips and chasms through which a largeportion of the earth made its way. I come to no absolute conclusion butthere is the man surrounded by the works of his hands his hatchets andhis carved flints which belong to the stony period and the onlyrational supposition is that like myself he visited the centre of theearth as a traveling tourist a pioneer of science. At all events therecan be no doubt of his great age and of his being one of the oldestrace of human beings.The Professor with these words ceased his oration and I burst forthinto loud and unanimous applause. Besides after all my uncle wasright. Much more learned men than his nephew would have found it ratherhard to refute his facts and arguments.Another circumstance soon presented itself. This fossilized body was notthe only one in this vast plain of bonesthe cemetery of an extinctworld. Other bodies were found as we trod the dusty plain and my unclewas able to choose the most marvelous of these specimens in order toconvince the most incredulous.In truth it was a surprising spectacle the successive remains ofgenerations and generations of men and animals confounded together inone vast cemetery. But a great question now presented itself to ournotice and one we were actually afraid to contemplate in all itsbearings.Had these once animated beings been buried so far beneath the soil bysome tremendous convulsion of nature after they had been earth to earthand ashes to ashes or had they lived here below in this subterraneanworld under this factitious sky borne married and given in marriageand died at last just like ordinary inhabitants of the earthUp to the present moment marine monsters fish and suchlike animalshad alone been seen aliveThe question which rendered us rather uneasy was a pertinent one. Wereany of these men of the abyss wandering about the deserted shores ofthis wondrous sea of the centre of the earthThis was a question which rendered me very uneasy and uncomfortable.How should they really be in existence would they receive us men fromaboveCHAPTER WHAT IS ITFor a long and weary hour we tramped over this great bed of bones. Weadvanced regardless of everything drawn on by ardent curiosity. Whatother marvels did this great cavern containwhat other wondroustreasures for the scientific man My eyes were quite prepared for anynumber of surprises my imagination lived in expectation of somethingnew and wonderful.The borders of the great Central Ocean had for some time disappearedbehind the hills that were scattered over the ground occupied by theplain of bones. The imprudent and enthusiastic Professor who did notcare whether he lost himself or not hurried me forward. We advancedsilently bathed in waves of electric fluid.By reason of a phenomenon which I cannot explain and thanks to itsextreme diffusion now complete the light illumined equally the sidesof every hill and rock. Its seat appeared to be nowhere in nodetermined force and produced no shade whatever.The appearance presented was that of a tropical country at midday insummerin the midst of the equatorial regions and under the verticalrays of the sun.All signs of vapor had disappeared. The rocks the distant mountainssome confused masses of faroff forests assumed a weird and mysteriousaspect under this equal distribution of the luminous fluidWe resembled to a certain extent the mysterious personage in one ofHoffmanns fantastic talesthe man who lost his shadow.After we had walked about a mile farther we came to the edge of a vastforest not however one of the vast mushroom forests we had discoverednear Port Gretchen.It was the glorious and wild vegetation of the Tertiary period in allits superb magnificence. Huge palms of a species now unknown superbpalmacitesa genus of fossil palms from the coal formationpinesyews cypress and conifers or conebearing trees the whole boundtogether by an inextricable and complicated mass of creeping plants.A beautiful carpet of mosses and ferns grew beneath the trees. Pleasantbrooks murmured beneath umbrageous boughs little worthy of this namefor no shade did they give. Upon their borders grew small treelikeshrubs such as are seen in the hot countries on our own inhabitedglobe.The one thing wanting in these plants these shrubs these treeswascolor Forever deprived of the vivifying warmth of the sun they werevapid and colorless. All shade was lost in one uniform tint of a brownand faded character. The leaves were wholly devoid of verdure and theflowers so numerous during the Tertiary period which gave them birthwere without color and without perfume something like paper discoloredby long exposure to the atmosphere.My uncle ventured beneath the gigantic groves. I followed him thoughnot without a certain amount of apprehension. Since nature had shownherself capable of producing such stupendous vegetable supplies whymight we not meet with mammals just as large and therefore dangerousI particularly remarked in the clearings left by trees that had fallenand been partially consumed by time many leguminous beanlike shrubssuch as the maple and other eatable trees dear to ruminating animals.Then there appeared confounded together and intermixed the trees ofsuch varied lands specimens of the vegetation of every part of theglobe there was the oak near the palm tree the Australian eucalyptusan interesting class of the order Myrtaceaeleaning against the tallNorwegian pine the poplar of the north mixing its branches with thoseof the New Zealand kauris. It was enough to drive the most ingeniousclassifier of the upper regions out of his mind and to upset all hisreceived ideas about botany.Suddenly I stopped short and restrained my uncle.The extreme diffuseness of the light enabled me to see the smallestobjects in the distant copses. I thought I sawno I really did seewith my own eyesimmense gigantic animals moving about under themighty trees. Yes they were truly gigantic animals a whole herd ofmastodons not fossils but living and exactly like those discovered in on the marshy banks of the great Ohio in North America.Yes I could see these enormous elephants whose trunks were tearingdown large boughs and working in and out the trees like a legion ofserpents. I could hear the sounds of the mighty tusks uprooting hugetreesThe boughs crackled and the whole masses of leaves and green brancheswent down the capacious throats of these terrible monstersThat wondrous dream when I saw the antehistorical times revivifiedwhen the Tertiary and Quaternary periods passed before me was nowrealizedAnd there we were alone far down in the bowels of the earth at themercy of its ferocious inhabitantsMy uncle paused full of wonder and astonishment.Come he said at last when his first surprise was over Come alongmy boy and let us see them nearer.No replied I restraining his efforts to drag me forward we arewholly without arms. What should we do in the midst of that flock ofgigantic quadrupeds Come away Uncle I implore you. No human creaturecan with impunity brave the ferocious anger of these monsters.No human creature said my uncle suddenly lowering his voice to amysterious whisper you are mistaken my dear Henry. Look look yonderIt seems to me that I behold a human beinga being like ourselvesamanI looked shrugging my shoulders decided to push incredulity to itsvery last limits. But whatever might have been my wish I was compelledto yield to the weight of ocular demonstration.Yesnot more than a quarter of a mile off leaning against the trunk ofan enormous tree was a human beinga Proteus of these subterraneanregions a new son of Neptune keeping this innumerable herd ofmastodons. Immanis pecoris custos immanior ipse The keeper of gigantic cattle himself still more giganticYesit was no longer a fossil whose corpse we had raised from theground in the great cemetery but a giant capable of guiding and drivingthese prodigious monsters. His height was above twelve feet. His headas big as the head of a buffalo was lost in a mane of matted hair. Itwas indeed a huge mane like those which belonged to the elephants ofthe earlier ages of the world.In his hand was a branch of a tree which served as a crook for thisantediluvian shepherd.We remained profoundly still speechless with surprise.But we might at any moment be seen by him. Nothing remained for us butinstant flight.Come come I cried dragging my uncle along and for the first timehe made no resistance to my wishes.A quarter of an hour later we were far away from that terrible monsterNow that I think of the matter calmly and that I reflect upon itdispassionately now that months years have passed since this strangeand unnatural adventure befell uswhat am I to think what am I tobelieveNo it is utterly impossible Our ears must have deceived us and oureyes have cheated us we have not seen what we believed we had seen. Nohuman being could by any possibility have existed in that subterraneanworld No generation of men could inhabit the lower caverns of the globewithout taking note of those who peopled the surface withoutcommunication with them. It was folly folly folly nothing elseI am rather inclined to admit the existence of some animal resembling instructure the human raceof some monkey of the first geological epochslike that discovered by M. Lartet in the ossiferous deposit of Sansan.But this animal or being whichsoever it was surpassed in height allthings known to modern science. Never mind. However unlikely it may beit might have been a monkeybut a man a living man and with him awhole generation of gigantic animals buried in the entrails of theearthit was too monstrous to be believedCHAPTER THE MYSTERIOUS DAGGERDuring this time we had left the bright and transparent forest farbehind us. We were mute with astonishment overcome by a kind of feelingwhich was next door to apathy. We kept running in spite of ourselves. Itwas a perfect Right which resembled one of those horrible sensations wesometimes meet with in our dreams.Instinctively we made our way towards the Central Sea and I cannot nowtell what wild thoughts passed through my mind nor of what follies Imight have been guilty but for a very serious preoccupation whichbrought me back to practical life.Though I was aware that we were treading on a soil quite new to us Ihowever every now and then noticed certain aggregations of rock theshape of which forcibly reminded me of those near Port Gretchen.This confirmed moreover the indications of the compass and ourextraordinary and unlookedfor as well as involuntary return to thenorth of this great Central Sea. It was so like our starting point thatI could scarcely doubt the reality of our position. Streams and cascadesfell in hundreds over the numerous projections of the rocks.I actually thought I could see our faithful and monotonous Hans and thewonderful grotto in which I had come back to life after my tremendousfall.Then as we advanced still farther the position of the cliffs theappearance of a stream the unexpected profile of a rock threw me againinto a state of bewildering doubt.After some time I explained my state of mental indecision to my uncle.He confessed to a similar feeling of hesitation. He was totally unableto make up his mind in the midst of this extraordinary but uniformpanorama.There can be no doubt I insisted that we have not landed exactly atthe place whence we first took our departure but the tempest hasbrought us above our starting point. I think therefore that if wefollow the coast we shall once more find Port Gretchen.In that case cried my uncle it is useless to continue ourexploration. The very best thing we can do is to make our way back tothe raft. Are you quite sure Harry that you are not mistakenIt is difficult was my reply to come to any decision for all theserocks are exactly alike. There is no marked difference between them. Atthe same time the impression on my mind is that I recognize thepromontory at the foot of which our worthy Hans constructed the raft. Weare I am nearly convinced near the little port if this be not it Iadded carefully examining a creek which appeared singularly familiar tomy mind.My dear Harryif this were the case we should find traces of our ownfootsteps some signs of our passage and I can really see nothing toindicate our having passed this way.But I see something I cried in an impetuous tone of voice as Irushed forward and eagerly picked up something which shone in the sandunder my feet.What is it cried the astonished and bewildered Professor.This was my reply.And I handed to my startled relative a rusty dagger of singular shape.What made you bring with you so useless a weapon he exclaimed. Itwas needlessly hampering yourself.I bring it It is quite new to me. I never saw it beforeare you sureit is not out of your collectionNot that I know of said the Professor puzzled. I have norecollection of the circumstance. It was never my property.This is very extraordinary I said musing over the novel and singularincident.Not at all. There is a very simple explanation Harry. The Icelandersare known to keep up the use of these antiquated weapons and this musthave belonged to Hans who has let it fall without knowing it.I shook my head. That dagger had never been in the possession of thepacific and taciturn Hans. I knew him and his habits too well.Then what can it beunless it be the weapon of some antediluvianwarrior I continued of some living man a contemporary of thatmighty shepherd from whom we have just escaped But nomystery uponmysterythis is no weapon of the stony epoch nor even of the bronzeperiod. It is made of excellent steelEre I could finish my sentence my uncle stopped me short from enteringupon a whole train of theories and spoke in his most cold and decidedtone of voice.Calm yourself my dear boy and endeavor to use your reason. Thisweapon upon which we have fallen so unexpectedly is a true idagueione of those worn by gentlemen in their belts during the sixteenthcentury. Its use was to give the icoup de gracei the final blow to thefoe who would not surrender. It is clearly of Spanish workmanship. Itbelongs neither to you nor to me nor the eiderdown hunter nor to anyof the living beings who may still exist so marvelously in the interiorof the earth.What can you mean Uncle I said now lost in a host of surmises.Look closely at it he continued these jagged edges were never madeby the resistance of human blood and bone. The blade is covered with aregular coating of iron mold and rust which is not a day old not ayear old not a century old but much moreThe Professor began to get quite excited according to custom and wasallowing himself to be carried away by his fertile imagination. I couldhave said something. He stopped me.Harry he cried we are now on the verge of a great discovery. Thisblade of a dagger you have so marvelously discovered after beingabandoned upon the sand for more than a hundred two hundred even threehundred years has been indented by someone endeavoring to carve aninscription on these rocks.But this poniard never got here of itself I exclaimed it could nothave twisted itself. Someone therefore must have preceded us upon theshores of this extraordinary sea.Yes a man.But what man has been sufficiently desperate to do such a thingA man who has somewhere written his name with this very daggera manwho has endeavored once more to indicate the right road to the interiorof the earth. Let us look around my boy. You know not the importance ofyour singular and happy discovery.Prodigiously interested we walked along the wall of rock examining thesmallest fissures which might finally expand into the much wishedforgully or shaft.We at last reached a spot where the shore became extremely narrow. Thesea almost bathed the foot of the rocks which were here very lofty andsteep. There was scarcely a path wider than two yards at any point. Atlast under a huge overhanging rock we discovered the entrance of adark and gloomy tunnel.There on a square tablet of granite which had been smoothed by rubbingit with another stone we could see two mysterious and much wornletters the two initials of the bold and extraordinary traveler who hadpreceded us on our adventurous journey.Illustration Runic GlyphA. S. cried my uncle. You see I was right. Arne Saknussemm alwaysArne SaknussemmCHAPTER NO OUTLETBLASTING THE ROCKEver since the commencement of our marvelous journey I had experiencedmany surprises had suffered from many illusions. I thought that I wascasehardened against all surprises and could neither see nor hearanything to amaze me again.I was like a many who having been round the world finds himself whollyblase and proof against the marvelous.When however I saw these two letters which had been engraven threehundred years before I stood fixed in an attitude of mute surprise.Not only was there the signature of the learned and enterprisingalchemist written in the rock but I held in my hand the very identicalinstrument with which he had laboriously engraved it.It was impossible without showing an amount of incredulity scarcelybecoming a sane man to deny the existence of the traveler and thereality of that voyage which I believed all along to have been amyththe mystification of some fertile brain.While these reflections were passing through my mind my uncle theProfessor gave way to an access of feverish and poetical excitement.Wonderful and glorious genius great Saknussemm he cried you haveleft no stone unturned no resource omitted to show to other mortalsthe way into the interior of our mighty globe and your fellow creaturescan find the trail left by your illustrious footsteps three hundredyears ago at the bottom of these obscure subterranean abodes. You havebeen careful to secure for others the contemplation of these wonders andmarvels of creation. Your name engraved at every important stage of yourglorious journey leads the hopeful traveler direct to the great andmighty discovery to which you devoted such energy and courage. Theaudacious traveler who shall follow your footsteps to the last willdoubtless find your initials engraved with your own hand upon the centreof the earth. I will be that audacious travelerI too will sign myname upon the very same spot upon the central granite stone of thiswondrous work of the Creator. But in justice to your devotion to yourcourage and to your being the first to indicate the road let thiscape seen by you upon the shores of this sea discovered by you becalled of all time Cape Saknussemm.This is what I heard and I began to be roused to the pitch ofenthusiasm indicated by those words. A fierce excitement roused me. Iforgot everything. The dangers of the voyage and the perils of thereturn journey were now as nothingWhat another man had done in ages past could I felt be done again Iwas determined to do it myself and now nothing that man hadaccomplished appeared to me impossible.Forwardforward I cried in a burst of genuine and hearty enthusiasm.I had already started in the direction of the somber and gloomy gallerywhen the Professor stopped me he the man so rash and hasty he theman so easily roused to the highest pitch of enthusiasm checked me andasked me to be patient and show more calm.Let us return to our good friend Hans he said we will then bringthe raft down to this place.I must say that though I at once yielded to my uncles request it wasnot without dissatisfaction and I hastened along the rocks of thatwonderful coast.Do you know my dear uncle I said as we walked along that we havebeen singularly helped by a concurrence of circumstances right up tothis very moment.So you begin to see it do you Harry said the Professor with asmile.Doubtless I responded and strangely enough even the tempest hasbeen the means of putting us on the right road. Blessings on thetempest It brought us safely back to the very spot from which fineweather would have driven us forever. Supposing we had succeeded inreaching the southern and distant shores of this extraordinary sea whatwould have become of us The name of Saknussemm would never haveappeared to us and at this moment we should have been cast away upon aninhospitable coast probably without an outlet.Yes Harry my boy there is certainly something providential in thatwandering at the mercy of wind and waves towards the south we have comeback exactly north and what is better still we fall upon this greatdiscovery of Cape Saknussemm. I mean to say that it is more thansurprising there is something in it which is far beyond mycomprehension. The coincidence is unheard of marvelousWhat matter It is not our duty to explain facts but to make the bestpossible use of them.Doubtless my boy but if you will allow me said the reallydelighted Professor.Excuse me sir but I see exactly how it will be we shall take thenorthern route we shall pass under the northern regions of Europeunder Sweden under Russia under Siberia and who knows whereinsteadof burying ourselves under the burning plains and deserts of Africa orbeneath the mighty waves of the ocean and that is all at this stage ofour journey that I care to know. Let us advance and Heaven will be ourguideYes Harry you are right quite right all is for the best. Let usabandon this horizontal sea which could never have led to anythingsatisfactory. We shall descend descend and everlastingly descend. Doyou know my dear boy that to reach the interior of the earth we haveonly five thousand miles to travelBah I cried carried away by a burst of enthusiasm the distance isscarcely worth speaking about. The thing is to make a start.My wild mad and incoherent speeches continued until we rejoined ourpatient and phlegmatic guide. All was we found prepared for animmediate departure. There was not a single parcel but what was in itsproper place. We all took up our posts on the raft and the sail beinghoisted Hans received his directions and guided the frail bark towardsCape Saknussemm as we had definitely named it.The wind was very unfavorable to a craft that was unable to sail closeto the wind. It was constructed to go before the blast. We werecontinually reduced to pushing ourselves forward by means of poles. Onseveral occasions the rocks ran far out into deep water and we werecompelled to make a long round. At last after three long and wearyhours of navigation that is to say about six oclock in the eveningwe found a place at which we could land.I jumped on shore first. In my present state of excitement andenthusiasm I was always first. My uncle and the Icelander followed. Thevoyage from the port to this point of the sea had by no means calmed me.It had rather produced the opposite effect. I even proposed to burn ourvessel that is to destroy our raft in order to completely cut off ourretreat. But my uncle sternly opposed this wild project. I began tothink him particularly lukewarm and unenthusiastic.At any rate my dear uncle I said let us start without delay.Yes my boy I am quite as eager to do so as you can be. But in thefirst place let us examine this mysterious gallery in order to find ifwe shall need to prepare and mend our ladders.My uncle now began to see to the efficiency of our Ruhmkorff coil whichwould doubtless soon be needed the raft securely fastened to a rockwas left alone. Moreover the opening into the new gallery was nottwenty paces distant from the spot. Our little troop with myself at thehead advanced.The orifice which was almost circular presented a diameter of aboutfive feet the somber tunnel was cut in the living rock and coated onthe inside by the different material which had once passed through it ina state of fusion. The lower part was about level with the water sothat we were able to penetrate to the interior without difficulty.We followed an almost horizontal direction when at the end of about adozen paces our further advance was checked by the interposition of anenormous block of granite rock.Accursed stone I cried furiously on perceiving that we were stoppedby what seemed an insurmountable obstacle.In vain we looked to the right in vain we looked to the left in vainexamined it above and below. There existed no passage no sign of anyother tunnel. I experienced the most bitter and painful disappointment.So enraged was I that I would not admit the reality of any obstacle. Istooped to my knees I looked under the mass of stone. No hole nointerstice. I then looked above. The same barrier of granite Hans withthe lamp examined the sides of the tunnel in every direction.But all in vain It was necessary to renounce all hope of passingthrough.I had seated myself upon the ground. My uncle walked angrily andhopelessly up and down. He was evidently desperate.But I cried after some moments thought what about ArneSaknussemmYou are right replied my uncle he can never have been checked by alump of rock.Noten thousand times no I cried with extreme vivacity. This hugelump of rock in consequence of some singular concussion or processone of those magnetic phenomena which have so often shaken theterrestrial crust has in some unexpected way closed up the passage.Many and many years have passed away since the return of Saknussemm andthe fall of this huge block of granite. Is it not quite evident thatthis gallery was formerly the outlet for the pentup lava in theinterior of the earth and that these eruptive matters then circulatedfreely Look at these recent fissures in the granite roof it isevidently formed of pieces of enormous stone placed here as if by thehand of a giant who had worked to make a strong and substantial arch.One day after an unusually strong shock the vast rock which stands inour way and which was doubtless the key of a kind of arch fell throughto a level with the soil and has barred our further progress. We areright then in thinking that this is an unexpected obstacle with whichSaknussemm did not meet and if we do not upset it in some way we areunworthy of following in the footsteps of the great discoverer andincapable of finding our way to the centre of the earthIn this wild way I addressed my uncle. The zeal of the Professor hisearnest longing for success had become part and parcel of my being. Iwholly forgot the past I utterly despised the future. Nothing existedfor me upon the surface of this spheroid in the bosom of which I wasengulfed no towns no country no Hamburg no Koenigstrasse not evenmy poor Gretchen who by this time would believe me utterly lost in theinterior of the earthWell cried my uncle roused to enthusiasm by my words Let us go towork with pickaxes with crowbars with anything that comes to handbutdown with these terrible walls.It is far too tough and too big to be destroyed by a pickax orcrowbar I replied.What thenAs I said it is useless to think of overcoming such a difficulty bymeans of ordinary tools.What thenWhat else but gunpowder a subterranean mine Let us blow up theobstacle that stands in our way.GunpowderYes all we have to do is to get rid of this paltry obstacle.To work Hans to work cried the Professor.The Icelander went back to the raft and soon returned with a hugecrowbar with which he began to dig a hole in the rock which was toserve as a mine. It was by no means a slight task. It was necessary forour purpose to make a cavity large enough to hold fifty pounds offulminating gun cotton the expansive power of which is four times asgreat as that of ordinary gunpowder.I had now roused myself to an almost miraculous state of excitement.While Hans was at work I actively assisted my uncle to prepare a longwick made from damp gunpowder the mass of which we finally enclosed ina bag of linen.We are bound to go through I cried enthusiastically.We are bound to go through responded the Professor tapping me on theback.At midnight our work as miners was completely finished the charge offulminating cotton was thrust into the hollow and the match which wehad made of considerable length was ready.A spark was now sufficient to ignite this formidable engine and to blowthe rock to atomsWe will now rest until tomorrow.It was absolutely necessary to resign myself to my fate and to consentto wait for the explosion for six weary hoursCHAPTER THE EXPLOSION AND ITS RESULTSThe next day which was the twentyseventh of August was a datecelebrated in our wondrous subterranean journey. I never think of iteven now but I shudder with horror. My heart beats wildly at the verymemory of that awful day.From this time forward our reason our judgment our human ingenuityhave nothing to do with the course of events. We are about to become theplaything of the great phenomena of the earthAt six oclock we were all up and ready. The dreaded moment was arrivingwhen we were about to seek an opening into the interior of the earth bymeans of gunpowder. What would be the consequences of breaking throughthe crust of the earthI begged that it might be my duty to set fire to the mine. I looked uponit as an honor. This task once performed I could rejoin my friends uponthe raft which had not been unloaded. As soon as we were all ready wewere to sail away to some distance to avoid the consequences of theexplosion the effects of which would certainly not be concentrated inthe interior of the earth.The slow match we calculated to burn for about ten minutes more orless before it reached the chamber in which the great body of powderwas confined. I should therefore have plenty of time to reach the raftand put off to a safe distance.I prepared to execute my selfallotted tasknot it must be confessedwithout considerable emotion.After a hearty repast my uncle and the hunterguide embarked on boardthe raft while I remained alone upon the desolate shore.I was provided with a lantern which was to enable me to set fire to thewick of the infernal machine.Go my boy said my uncle and Heaven be with you. But come back assoon as you can. I shall be all impatience.Be easy on that matter I replied there is no fear of my delaying onthe road.Having said this I advanced toward the opening of the somber gallery.My heart beat wildly. I opened my lantern and seized the extremity ofthe wick.The Professor who was looking on held his chronometer in his hand.Are you ready cried he.Quite ready.Well then fire awayI hastened to put the light to the wick which crackled and sparkledhissing and spitting like a serpent then running as fast as I could Ireturned to the shore.Get on board my lad and you Hans shove off cried my uncle.By a vigorous application of his pole Hans sent us flying over thewater. The raft was quite twenty fathoms distant.It was a moment of palpitating interest of deep anxiety. My uncle theProfessor never took his eyes off the chronometer.Only five minutes more he said in a low tone only four onlythree.My pulse went a hundred to the minute. I could hear my heart beating.Only two one Now then mountains of granite crumble beneath thepower of manWhat happened after that As to the terrific roar of the explosion I donot think I heard it. But the form of the rocks completely changed in myeyesthey seemed to be drawn aside like a curtain. I saw a fathomlessa bottomless abyss which yawned beneath the turgid waves. The seawhich seemed suddenly to have gone mad then became one greatmountainous mass upon the top of which the raft rose perpendicularly.We were all thrown down. In less than a second the light gave place tothe most profound obscurity. Then I felt all solid support give way notto my feet but to the raft itself. I thought it was going bodily down atremendous well. I tried to speak to question my uncle. Nothing couldbe heard but the roaring of the mighty waves. We clung together in uttersilence.Despite the awful darkness despite the noise the surprise theemotion I thoroughly understood what had happened.Beyond the rock which had been blown up there existed a mighty abyss.The explosion had caused a kind of earthquake in this soil broken byfissures and rents. The gulf thus suddenly thrown open was about toswallow the inland sea which transformed into a mighty torrent wasdragging us with it.Only one idea filled my mind. We were utterly and completely lostOne hour two hourswhat more I cannot say passed in this manner. Wesat close together elbow touching elbow knee touching knee We heldone anothers hands not to be thrown off the raft. We were subjected tothe most violent shocks whenever our sole dependence a frail woodenraft struck against the rocky sides of the channel. Fortunately for usthese concussions became less and less frequent which made me fancythat the gallery was getting wider and wider. There could be now nodoubt that we had chanced upon the road once followed by Saknussemm butinstead of going down in a proper manner we had through our ownimprudence drawn a whole sea with usThese ideas presented themselves to my mind in a very vague and obscuremanner. I felt rather than reasoned. I put my ideas together onlyconfusedly while spinning along like a man going down a waterfall. Tojudge by the air which as it were whipped my face we must have beenrushing at a perfectly lightning rate.To attempt under these circumstances to light a torch was simplyimpossible and the last remains of our electric machine of ourRuhmkorff coil had been destroyed during the fearful explosion.I was therefore very much confused to see at last a bright light shiningclose to me. The calm countenance of the guide seemed to gleam upon me.The clever and patient hunter had succeeded in lighting the lantern andthough in the keen and thorough draft the flame flickered andvacillated and was nearly put out it served partially to dissipate theawful obscurity.The gallery into which we had entered was very wide. I was thereforequite right in that part of my conjecture. The insufficient light didnot allow us to see both of the walls at the same time. The slope ofwaters which was carrying us away was far greater than that of themost rapid river of America. The whole surface of the stream seemed tobe composed of liquid arrows darted forward with extreme violence andpower. I can give no idea of the impression it made upon me.The raft at times caught in certain whirlpools and rushed forwardyet turned on itself all the time. How it did not upset I shall never beable to understand. When it approached the sides of the gallery I tookcare to throw upon them the light of the lantern and I was able tojudge of the rapidity of motion by looking at the projecting masses ofrock which as soon as seen were again invisible. So rapid was ourprogress that points of rock at a considerable distance one from theother appeared like portions of transverse lines which enclosed us in akind of net like that of a line of telegraphic wires.I believe we were now going at a rate of not less than a hundred milesan hour.My uncle and I looked at one another with wild and haggard eyes weclung convulsively to the stump of the mast which at the moment whenthe catastrophe took place had snapped short off. We turned our backsas much as possible to the wind in order not to be stifled by arapidity of motion which nothing human could face and live.And still the long monotonous hours went on. The situation did notchange in the least though a discovery I suddenly made seemed tocomplicate it very much.When we had slightly recovered our equilibrium I proceeded to examineour cargo. I then made the unsatisfactory discovery that the greaterpart of it had utterly disappeared.I became alarmed and determined to discover what were our resources. Myheart beat at the idea but it was absolutely necessary to know on whatwe had to depend. With this view I took the lantern and looked around.Of all our former collection of nautical and philosophical instrumentsthere remained only the chronometer and the compass. The ladders andropes were reduced to a small piece of rope fastened to the stump of themast. Not a pickax not a crowbar not a hammer and far worse thanall no foodnot enough for one dayThis discovery was a prelude to a certain and horrible death.Seated gloomily on the raft clasping the stump of the mastmechanically I thought of all I had read as to sufferings fromstarvation.I remembered everything that history had taught me on the subject and Ishuddered at the remembrance of the agonies to be endured.Maddened at the prospects of enduring the miseries of starvation Ipersuaded myself that I must be mistaken. I examined the cracks in theraft I poked between the joints and beams I examined every possiblehole and corner. The result wassimply nothingOur stock of provisions consisted of nothing but a piece of dry meat andsome soaked and halfmoldy biscuits.I gazed around me scared and frightened. I could not understand theawful truth. And yet of what consequence was it in regard to any newdanger Supposing that we had had provisions for months and even foryears how could we ever get out of the awful abyss into which we werebeing hurled by the irresistible torrent we had let looseWhy should we trouble ourselves about the sufferings and tortures to beendured from hunger when death stared us in the face under so many otherswifter and perhaps even more horrid formsIt was very doubtful under the circumstances in which we were placedif we should have time to die of inanition.But the human frame is singularly constituted.I know not how it was but from some singular hallucination of themind I forgot the real serious and immediate danger to which we wereexposed to think of the menaces of the future which appeared before usin all their naked terror. Besides after all suggested Hope perhapswe might finally escape the fury of the raging torrent and once morerevisit the glimpses of the moon on the surface of our beautiful MotherEarth.How was it to be done I had not the remotest idea. Where were we tocome out No matter so that we did.One chance in a thousand is always a chance while death from hungergave us not even the faintest glimpse of hope. It left to theimagination nothing but blank horror without the faintest chance ofescapeI had the greatest mind to reveal all to my uncle to explain to him theextraordinary and wretched position to which we were reduced in orderthat between the two we might make a calculation as to the exact spaceof time which remained for us to live.It was it appeared to me the only thing to be done. But I had thecourage to hold my tongue to gnaw at my entrails like the Spartan boy.I wished to leave him all his coolness.At this moment the light of the lantern slowly fell and at last wentoutThe wick had wholly burnt to an end. The obscurity became absolute. Itwas no longer possible to see through the impenetrable darkness Therewas one torch left but it was impossible to keep it alight. Then likea child I shut my eyes that I might not see the darkness.After a great lapse of time the rapidity of our journey increased. Icould feel it by the rush of air upon my face. The slope of the waterswas excessive. I began to feel that we were no longer going down aslope we were falling. I felt as one does in a dream going downbodilyfalling falling fallingI felt that the hands of my uncle and Hans were vigorously clasping myarms.Suddenly after a lapse of time scarcely appreciable I felt somethinglike a shock. The raft had not struck a hard body but had suddenly beenchecked in its course. A waterspout a liquid column of water fell uponus. I felt suffocating. I was being drowned.Still the sudden inundation did not last. In a few seconds I felt myselfonce more able to breathe. My uncle and Hans pressed my arms and theraft carried us all three away.CHAPTER THE APE GIGANSIt is difficult for me to determine what was the real time but I shouldsuppose by after calculation that it must have been ten at night.I lay in a stupor a half dream during which I saw visions ofastounding character. Monsters of the deep were side by side with themighty elephantine shepherd. Gigantic fish and animals seemed to formstrange conjunctions.The raft took a sudden turn whirled round entered another tunnelthistime illumined in a most singular manner. The roof was formed of porousstalactite through which a moonlit vapor appeared to pass casting itsbrilliant light upon our gaunt and haggard figures. The light increasedas we advanced while the roof ascended until at last we were oncemore in a kind of water cavern the lofty dome of which disappeared in aluminous cloudA rugged cavern of small extent appeared to offer a halting place to ourweary bodies.My uncle and the guide moved as men in a dream. I was afraid to wakenthem knowing the danger of such a sudden start. I seated myself besidethem to watch.As I did so I became aware of something moving in the distance whichat once fascinated my eyes. It was floating apparently upon thesurface of the water advancing by means of what at first appearedpaddles. I looked with glaring eyes. One glance told me that it wassomething monstrous.But whatIt was the great sharkcrocodile of the early writers on geology.About the size of an ordinary whale with hideous jaws and two giganticeyes it advanced. Its eyes fixed on me with terrible sternness. Someindefinite warning told me that it had marked me for its own.I attempted to riseto escape no matter where but my knees shookunder me my limbs trembled violently I almost lost my senses. Andstill the mighty monster advanced. My uncle and the guide made no effortto save themselves.With a strange noise like none other I had ever heard the beast cameon. His jaws were at least seven feet apart and his distended mouthlooked large enough to have swallowed a boatful of men.We were about ten feet distant when I discovered that much as his bodyresembled that of a crocodile his mouth was wholly that of a shark.His twofold nature now became apparent. To snatch us up at a mouthful itwas necessary for him to turn on his back which motion necessarilycaused his legs to kick up helplessly in the air.I actually laughed even in the very jaws of deathBut next minute with a wild cry I darted away into the interior of thecave leaving my unhappy comrades to their fate This cavern was deepand dreary. After about a hundred yards I paused and looked around.The whole floor composed of sand and malachite was strewn with bonesfreshly gnawed bones of reptiles and fish with a mixture of mammalia.My very soul grew sick as my body shuddered with horror. I had trulyaccording to the old proverb fallen out of the frying pan into thefire. Some beast larger and more ferocious even than the sharkcrocodileinhabited this den.What could I do The mouth of the cave was guarded by one ferociousmonster the interior was inhabited by something too hideous tocontemplate. Flight was impossibleOnly one resource remained and that was to find some small hiding placeto which the fearful denizens of the cavern could not penetrate. I gazedwildly around and at last discovered a fissure in the rock to which Irushed in the hope of recovering my scattered senses.Crouching down I waited shivering as in an ague fit. No man is brave inpresence of an earthquake or a bursting boiler or an explodingtorpedo. I could not be expected to feel much courage in presence of thefearful fate that appeared to await me.An hour passed. I heard all the time a strange rumbling outside thecave.What was the fate of my unhappy companions It was impossible for me topause to inquire. My own wretched existence was all I could think of.Suddenly a groaning as of fifty bears in a fight fell upon myearshisses spitting moaning hideous to hearand then I sawNever were ages to pass over my head shall I forget the horribleapparition.It was the Ape GigansFourteen feet high covered with coarse hair of a blackish brown thehair on the arms from the shoulder to the elbow joints pointingdownwards while that from the wrist to the elbow pointed upwards itadvanced. Its arms were as long as its body while its legs wereprodigious. It had thick long and sharply pointed teethlike amammoth saw.It struck its breast as it came on smelling and sniffing reminding meof the stories we read in our early childhood of giants who ate theFlesh of men and little boysSuddenly it stopped. My heart beat wildly for I was conscious thatsomehow or other the fearful monster had smelled me out and was peeringabout with his hideous eyes to try and discover my whereabouts.My reading which as a rule is a blessing but which on this occasionseemed momentarily to prove a curse told me the real truth. It was theApe Gigans the antediluvian gorilla.Yes This awful monster confined by good fortune to the interior of theearth was the progenitor of the hideous monster of Africa.He glared wildly about seeking somethingdoubtless myself. I gavemyself up for lost. No hope of safety or escape seemed to remain.At this moment just as my eyes appeared to close in death there came astrange noise from the entrance of the cave and turning the gorillaevidently recognized some enemy more worthy his prodigious size andstrength. It was the huge sharkcrocodile which perhaps having disposedof my friends was coming in search of further prey.The gorilla placed himself on the defensive and clutching a bone someseven or eight feet in length a perfect club aimed a deadly blow atthe hideous beast which reared upwards and fell with all its weightupon its adversary.A terrible combat the details of which it is impossible to give nowensued. The struggle was awful and ferocious I however did not waitto witness the result. Regarding myself as the object of contention Idetermined to remove from the presence of the victor. I slid down frommy hiding place reached the ground and gliding against the wallstrove to gain the open mouth of the cavern.But I had not taken many steps when the fearful clamor ceased to befollowed by a mumbling and groaning which appeared to be indicative ofvictory.I looked back and saw the huge ape gory with blood coming after mewith glaring eyes with dilated nostrils that gave forth two columns ofheated vapor. I could feel his hot and fetid breath on my neck and witha horrid jumpawoke from my nightmare sleep.Yesit was all a dream. I was still on the raft with my uncle and theguide.The relief was not instantaneous for under the influence of the hideousnightmare my senses had become numbed. After a while however myfeelings were tranquilized. The first of my perceptions which returnedin full force was that of hearing. I listened with acute and attentiveears. All was still as death. All I comprehended was silence. To theroaring of the waters which had filled the gallery with awfulreverberations succeeded perfect peace.After some little time my uncle spoke in a low and scarcely audibletone Harry boy where are youI am here was my faint rejoinder.Well dont you see what has happened We are going upwards.My dear uncle what can you mean was my halfdelirious reply.Yes I tell you we are ascending rapidly. Our downward journey is quitechecked.I held out my hand and after some little difficulty succeeded intouching the wall. My hand was in an instant covered with blood. Theskin was torn from the flesh. We were ascending with extraordinaryrapidity.The torchthe torch cried the Professor wildly it must belighted.Hans the guide after many vain efforts at last succeeded in lightingit and the flame having now nothing to prevent its burning shed atolerably clear light. We were enabled to form an approximate idea ofthe truth.It is just as I thought said my uncle after a moment or two ofsilent attention. We are in a narrow well about four fathoms square.The waters of the great inland sea having reached the bottom of thegulf are now forcing themselves up the mighty shaft. As a naturalconsequence we are being cast upon the summit of the waters.That I can see was my lugubrious reply but where will this shaftend and to what fall are we likely to be exposedOf that I am as ignorant as yourself. All I know is that we should beprepared for the worst. We are going up at a fearfully rapid rate. Asfar as I can judge we are ascending at the rate of two fathoms asecond of a hundred and twenty fathoms a minute or rather more thanthree and a half leagues an hour. At this rate our fate will soon be amatter of certainty.No doubt of it was my reply. The great concern I have now howeveris to know whether this shaft has any issue. It may end in a graniteroofin which case we shall be suffocated by compressed air or dashedto atoms against the top. I fancy already that the air is beginning tobe close and condensed. I have a difficulty in breathing.This might be fancy or it might be the effect of our rapid motion butI certainly felt a great oppression of the chest.Henry said the Professor I do believe that the situation is to acertain extent desperate. There remain however many chances ofultimate safety and I have in my own mind been revolving them overduring your heavy but agitated sleep. I have come to this logicalconclusionwhereas we may at any moment perish so at any moment we maybe saved We need therefore prepare ourselves for whatever may turn upin the great chapter of accidents.But what would you have us do I cried. Are we not utterly helplessNo While there is life there is hope. At all events there is onething we can doeat and thus obtain strength to face victory ordeath.As he spoke I looked at my uncle with a haggard glance. I had put offthe fatal communication as long as possible. It was now forced upon meand I must tell him the truth.Still I hesitated.Eat I said in a deprecating tone as if there were no hurry.Yes and at once. I feel like a starving prisoner he said rubbinghis yellow and shivering hands together.And turning round to the guide he spoke some hearty cheering wordsas I judged from his tone in Danish. Hans shook his head in a terriblysignificant manner. I tried to look unconcerned.What cried the Professor you do not mean to say that all ourprovisions are lostYes was my lowly spoken reply as I held out something in my handthis morsel of dried meat is all that remains for us three.My uncle gazed at me as if he could not fully appreciate the meaning ofmy words. The blow seemed to stun him by its severity. I allowed him toreflect for some moments.Well said I after a short pause what do you think now Is thereany chance of our escaping from our horrible subterranean dangers Arewe not doomed to perish in the great hollows of the centre of theearthBut my pertinent questions brought no answer. My uncle either heard menot or appeared not to do so.And in this way a whole hour passed. Neither of us cared to speak. Formyself I began to feel the most fearful and devouring hunger. Mycompanions doubtless felt the same horrible tortures but neither ofthem would touch the wretched morsel of meat that remained. It laythere a last remnant of all our great preparations for the mad andsenseless journeyI looked back with wonderment to my own folly. Fully was I aware thatdespite his enthusiasm and the evertobehated scroll of Saknussemmmy uncle should never have started on his perilous voyage. What memoriesof the happy past what previsions of the horrible future now filled mybrainCHAPTER HUNGERHunger prolonged is temporary madness The brain is at work withoutits required food and the most fantastic notions fill the mind.Hitherto I had never known what hunger really meant. I was likely tounderstand it now.And yet three months before I could tell my terrible story ofstarvation as I thought it. As a boy I used to make frequent excursionsin the neighborhood of the Professors house.My uncle always acted on system and he believed that in addition tothe day of rest and worship there should be a day of recreation. Inconsequence I was always free to do as I liked on a Wednesday.Now as I had a notion to combine the useful and the agreeable myfavorite pastime was birds nesting. I had one of the best collectionsof eggs in all the town. They were classified and under glass cases.There was a certain wood which by rising at early morn and taking thecheap train I could reach at eleven in the morning. Here I wouldbotanize or geologize at my will. My uncle was always glad of specimensfor his herbarium and stones to examine. When I had filled my wallet Iproceeded to search for nests.After about two hours of hard work I one day sat down by a stream toeat my humble but copious lunch. How the remembrance of the spicedsausage the wheaten loaf and the beer made my mouth water now Iwould have given every prospect of worldly wealth for such a meal. Butto my story.While seated thus at my leisure I looked up at the ruins of an oldcastle at no great distance. It was the remains of an historicaldwelling ivyclad and now falling to pieces.While looking I saw two eagles circling about the summit of a loftytower. I soon became satisfied that there was a nest. Now in all mycollection I lacked eggs of the native eagle and the large owl.My mind was made up. I would reach the summit of that tower or perishin the attempt. I went nearer and surveyed the ruins. The oldstaircase years before had fallen in. The outer walls were howeverintact. There was no chance that way unless I looked to the ivy solelyfor support. This was as I soon found out futile.There remained the chimney which still went up to the top and had onceserved to carry off the smoke from every story of the tower.Up this I determined to venture. It was narrow rough and therefore themore easily climbed. I took off my coat and crept into the chimney.Looking up I saw a small light opening proclaiming the summit of thechimney.Upup I went for some time using my hands and knees after the fashionof a chimney sweep. It was slow work but there being continualprojections the task was comparatively easy. In this way I reachedhalfway. The chimney now became narrower. The atmosphere was close andat last to end the matter I stuck fast. I could ascend no higher.There could be no doubt of this and there remained no resource but todescend and give up my glorious prey in despair. I yielded to fate andendeavored to descend. But I could not move. Some unseen and mysteriousobstacle intervened and stopped me. In an instant the full horror of mysituation seized me.I was unable to move either way and was doomed to a terrible andhorrible death that of starvation. In a boys mind however there isan extraordinary amount of elasticity and hope and I began to think ofall sorts of plans to escape my gloomy fate.In the first place I required no food just at present having had anexcellent meal and was therefore allowed time for reflection. My firstthought was to try and move the mortar with my hand. Had I possessed aknife something might have been done but that useful instrument I hadleft in my coat pocket.I soon found that all efforts of this kind were vain and useless andthat all I could hope to do was to wriggle downwards.But though I jerked and struggled and strove to turn it was all invain. I could not move an inch one way or the other. And time flewrapidly. My early rising probably contributed to the fact that I feltsleepy and gradually gave way to the sensation of drowsiness.I slept and awoke in darkness ravenously hungry.Night had come and still I could not move. I was tight bound and didnot succeed in changing my position an inch. I groaned aloud. Neversince the days of my happy childhood when it was a hardship to go frommeal to meal without eating had I really experienced hunger. Thesensation was as novel as it was painful. I began now to lose my headand to scream and cry out in my agony. Something appeared startled bymy noise. It was a harmless lizard but it appeared to me a loathsomereptile. Again I made the old ruins resound with my cries and finallyso exhausted myself that I fainted.How long I lay in a kind of trance or sleep I cannot say but when againI recovered consciousness it was day. How ill I felt how hunger stillgnawed at me it would be hard to say. I was too weak to scream now fartoo weak to struggle.Suddenly I was startled by a roar.Are you there Henry said the voice of my uncle are you there myboyI could only faintly respond but I also made a desperate effort toturn. Some mortar fell. To this I owed my being discovered. When thesearch took place it was easily seen that mortar and small pieces ofstone had recently fallen from above. Hence my uncles cry.Be calm he cried if we pull down the whole ruin you shall besaved.They were delicious words but I had little hope.Soon however about a quarter of an hour later I heard a voice above meat one of the upper fireplaces.Are you below or aboveBelow was my reply.In an instant a basket was lowered with milk a biscuit and an egg. Myuncle was fearful to be too ready with his supply of food. I drank themilk first for thirst had nearly deadened hunger. I then muchrefreshed ate my bread and hard egg.They were now at work at the wall. I could hear a pickax. Wishing toescape all danger from this terrible weapon I made a desperate struggleand the belt which surrounded my waist and which had been hitched on astone gave way. I was free and only escaped falling down by a rapidmotion of my hands and knees.In ten minutes more I was in my uncles arms after being two days andnights in that horrible prison. My occasional delirium prevented me fromcounting time.I was weeks recovering from that awful starvation adventure and yetwhat was that to the hideous sufferings I now enduredAfter dreaming for some time and thinking of this and other matters Ionce more looked around me. We were still ascending with fearfulrapidity. Every now and then the air appeared to check our respirationas it does that of aeronauts when the ascension of the balloon is toorapid. But if they feel a degree of cold in proportion to the elevationthey attain in the atmosphere we experienced quite a contrary effect.The heat began to increase in a most threatening and exceptional manner.I cannot tell exactly the mean but I think it must have reached onehundred twentytwo degrees Fahrenheit.What was the meaning of this extraordinary change in the temperature Asfar as we had hitherto gone facts had proved the theories of Davy andof Lidenbrock to be correct. Until now all the peculiar conditions ofrefractory rocks of electricity of magnetism had modified the generallaws of nature and had created for us a moderate temperature for thetheory of the central fire remained in my eyes the only explainableone.Were we then going to reach a position in which these phenomena wereto be carried out in all their rigor and in which the heat would reducethe rocks to a state of fusionSuch was my not unnatural fear and I did not conceal the fact from myuncle. My way of doing so might be cold and heartless but I could nothelp it.If we are not drowned or smashed into pancakes and if we do not dieof starvation we have the satisfaction of knowing that we must beburned alive.My uncle in presence of this brusque attack simply shrugged hisshoulders and resumed his reflectionswhatever they might be.An hour passed away and except that there was a slight increase in thetemperature no incident modified the situation.My uncle at last of his own accord broke silence.Well Henry my boy he said in a cheerful way we must make up ourminds.Make up our minds to what I asked in considerable surprise.Wellto something. We must at whatever risk recruit our physicalstrength. If we make the fatal mistake of husbanding our little remnantof food we may probably prolong our wretched existence a few hoursbutwe shall remain weak to the end.Yes I growled to the end. That however will not keep us longwaiting.Well only let a chance of safety present itselfonly allow that amoment of action be necessarywhere shall we find the means of actionif we allow ourselves to be reduced to physical weakness by inanitionWhen this piece of meat is devoured Uncle what hope will there remainunto usNone my dear Henry none. But will it do you any good to devour itwith your eyes You appear to me to reason like one without will ordecision like a being without energy.Then cried I exasperated to a degree which is scarcely to beexplained you do not mean to tell methat youthat youhave notlost all hope.Certainly not replied the Professor with consummate coolness.You mean to tell me Uncle that we shall get out of this monstroussubterranean shaftWhile there is life there is hope. I beg to assert Henry that as longas a mans heart beats as long as a mans flesh quivers I do not allowthat a being gifted with thought and will can allow himself to despair.What a nerve The man placed in a position like that we occupied musthave been very brave to speak like this.Well I cried what do you mean to doEat what remains of the food we have in our hands let us swallow thelast crumb. It will bel Heaven willing our last repast. Well nevermindinstead of being exhausted skeletons we shall be men.True muttered I in a despairing tone let us take our fill.We must replied my uncle with a deep sigh call it what you will.My uncle took a piece of the meat that remained and some crusts ofbiscuit which had escaped the wreck. He divided the whole into threeparts.Each had one pound of food to last him as long as he remained in theinterior of the earth.Each now acted in accordance with his own private character.My uncle the Professor ate greedily but evidently without appetiteeating simply from some mechanical motion. I put the food inside mylips and hungry as I was chewed my morsel without pleasure andwithout satisfaction.Hans the guide just as if he had been eiderdown hunting swallowedevery mouthful as though it were a usual affair. He looked like a manequally prepared to enjoy superfluity or total want.Hans in all probability was no more used to starvation than ourselvesbut his hardy Icelandic nature had prepared him for many sufferings. Aslong as he received his three rixdollars every Saturday night he wasprepared for anything.The fact was Hans never troubled himself about much except his money.He had undertaken to serve a certain man at so much per week and nomatter what evils befell his employer or himself he never found faultor grumbled so long as his wages were duly paid.Suddenly my uncle roused himself. He had seen a smile on the face of ourguide. I could not make it out.What is the matter said my uncle.Schiedam said the guide producing a bottle of this precious fluid.We drank. My uncle and myself will own to our dying day that hence wederived strength to exist until the last bitter moment. That preciousbottle of Hollands was in reality only half full but under thecircumstances it was nectar.It took some minutes for myself and my uncle to form a decided opinionon the subject. The worthy Professor swallowed about half a pint and didnot seem able to drink any more.iFortraffligi said Hans swallowing nearly all that was left.Excellentvery good said my uncle with as much gusto as if he hadjust left the steps of the club at Hamburg.I had begun to feel as if there had been one gleam of hope. Now allthought of the future vanishedWe had consumed our last ounce of food and it was five oclock in themorningCHAPTER THE VOLCANIC SHAFTMans constitution is so peculiar that his health is purely a negativematter. No sooner is the rage of hunger appeased than it becomesdifficult to comprehend the meaning of starvation. It is only when yousuffer that you really understand.As to anyone who has not endured privation having any notion of thematter it is simply absurd.With us after a long fast some mouthfuls of bread and meat a littlemoldy biscuit and salt beef triumphed over all our previous gloomy andsaturnine thoughts.Nevertheless after this repast each gave way to his own reflections. Iwondered what were those of Hansthe man of the extreme north who wasyet gifted with the fatalistic resignation of Oriental character. Butthe utmost stretch of the imagination would not allow me to realize thetruth. As for my individual self my thoughts had ceased to be anythingbut memories of the past and were all connected with that upper worldwhich I never should have left. I saw it all now the beautiful house inthe Konigstrasse my poor Gretchen the good Martha they all passedbefore my mind like visions of the past. Every time any of thelugubrious groanings which were to be distinguished in the hollowsaround fell upon my ears I fancied I heard the distant murmur of thegreat cities above my head.As for my uncle always thinking of his science he examined the natureof the shaft by means of a torch. He closely examined the differentstrata one above the other in order to recognize his situation bygeological theory. This calculation or rather this estimation could byno means be anything but approximate. But a learned man a philosopheris nothing if not a philosopher when he keeps his ideas calm andcollected and certainly the Professor possessed this quality toperfection.I heard him as I sat in silence murmuring words of geological science.As I understood his object and his meaning I could not but interestmyself despite my preoccupation in that terrible hour.Eruptive granite he said to himself we are still in the primitiveepoch. But we are going upgoing up still going up. But who knows WhoknowsThen he still hoped. He felt along the vertical sides of the shaft withhis hand and some few minutes later he would go on again in thefollowing styleThis is gneiss. This is mica schistsiliceous mineral. Good againthis is the epoch of transition at all events we are close tothemand then and thenWhat could the Professor mean Could he by any conceivable meansmeasure the thickness of the crust of the earth suspended above ourheads Did he possess any possible means of making any approximation tothis calculation No.The manometer was wanting and no summary estimation could take theplace of it.And yet as we progressed the temperature increased in the mostextraordinary degree and I began to feel as if I were bathed in a hotand burning atmosphere. Never before had I felt anything like it. Icould only compare it to the hot vapor from an iron foundry when theliquid iron is in a state of ebullition and runs over. By degrees andone after the other Hans my uncle and myself had taken off our coatsand waistcoats. They were unbearable. Even the slightest garment was notonly uncomfortable but the cause of extreme suffering.Are we ascending to a living fire I cried when to my horror andastonishment the heat became greater than before.No no said my uncle it is simply impossible quite impossible.And yet said I touching the side of the shaft with my naked handthis wall is literally burning.At this moment feeling as I did that the sides of this extraordinarywall were red hot I plunged my hands into the water to cool them. Idrew them back with a cry of despair.The water is boiling I cried.My uncle the Professor made no reply other than a gesture of rage anddespair.Something very like the truth had probably struck his imagination.But I could take no share in either what was going on or in hisspeculations. An invincible dread had taken possession of my brain andsoul. I could only look forward to an immediate catastrophe such acatastrophe as not even the most vivid imagination could have thoughtof. An idea at first vague and uncertain was gradually being changedinto certainty.I tremulously rejected it at first but it forced itself upon me bydegrees with extreme obstinacy. It was so terrible an idea that Iscarcely dared to whisper it to myself.And yet all the while certain and as it were involuntary observationsdetermined my convictions. By the doubtful glare of the torch I couldmake out some singular changes in the granitic strata a strange andterrible phenomenon was about to be produced in which electricityplayed a part.Then this boiling water this terrible and excessive heat I determinedas a last resource to examine the compass.The compass had gone madYes wholly stark staring mad. The needle jumped from pole to pole withsudden and surprising jerks ran round or as it is said boxed thecompass and then ran suddenly back again as if it had the vertigo.I was aware that according to the best acknowledged theories it was areceived notion that the mineral crust of the globe is never and neverhas been in a state of complete repose.It is perpetually undergoing the modifications caused by thedecomposition of internal matter the agitation consequent on theflowing of extensive liquid currents the excessive action of magnetismwhich tends to shake it incessantly at a time when even themultitudinous beings on its surface do not suspect the seething processto be going on.Still this phenomenon would not have alarmed me alone it would not havearoused in my mind a terrible an awful idea.But other facts could not allow my selfdelusion to last.Terrible detonations like Heavens artillery began to multiplythemselves with fearful intensity. I could only compare them with thenoise made by hundreds of heavily laden chariots being madly driven overa stone pavement. It was a continuous roll of heavy thunder.And then the mad compass shaken by the wild electric phenomenaconfirmed me in my rapidly formed opinion. The mineral crust was aboutto burst the heavy granite masses were about to rejoin the fissure wasabout to close the void was about to be filled up and we poor atoms tobe crushed in its awful embraceUncle Uncle I cried we are wholly irretrievably lostWhat then my young friend is your new cause of terror and alarm hesaid in his calmest manner. What fear you nowWhat do I fear now I cried in fierce and angry tones. Do you not seethat the walls of the shaft are in motion Do you not see that the solidgranite masses are cracking Do you not feel the terrible torrid heatDo you not observe the awful boiling water on which we float Do you notremark this mad needle Every sign and portent of an awful earthquakeMy uncle coolly shook his head.An earthquake he replied in the most calm and provoking tone.Yes.My nephew I tell you that you are utterly mistaken he continued.Do you not can you not recognize all the wellknown symtonsOf an earthquake By no means. I am expecting something far moreimportant.My brain is strained beyond endurancewhat what do you mean Icried.An eruption Harry.An eruption I gasped. We are then in the volcanic shaft of acrater in full action and vigor.I have every reason to think so said the Professor in a smiling toneand I beg to tell you that it is the most fortunate thing that couldhappen to us.The most fortunate thing Had my uncle really and truly gone mad Whatdid he mean by these awful wordswhat did he mean by this terriblecalm this solemn smileWhat cried I in the height of my exasperation we are on the way toan eruption are we Fatality has cast us into a well of burning andboiling lava of rocks on fire of boiling water in a word filled withevery kind of eruptive matter We are about to be expelled thrown upvomited spit out of the interior of the earth in common with hugeblocks of granite with showers of cinders and scoriae in a wildwhirlwind of flame and you saythe most fortunate thing which couldhappen to us.Yes replied the Professor looking at me calmly from under hisspectacles it is the only chance which remains to us of ever escapingfrom the interior of the earth to the light of day.It is quite impossible that I can put on paper the thousand strangewild thoughts which followed this extraordinary announcement.But my uncle was right quite right and never had he appeared to me soaudacious and so convinced as when he looked me calmly in the face andspoke of the chances of an eruptionof our being cast upon Mother Earthonce more through the gaping crater of a volcanoNevertheless while we were speaking we were still ascending we passedthe whole night going up or to speak more scientifically in anascensional motion. The fearful noise redoubled I was ready tosuffocate. I seriously believed that my last hour was approaching andyet so strange is imagination all I thought of was some childishhypothesis or other. In such circumstances you do not choose your ownthoughts. They overcome you.It was quite evident that we were being cast upwards by eruptive matterunder the raft there was a mass of boiling water and under this was aheavier mass of lava and an aggregate of rocks which on reaching thesummit of the water would be dispersed in every direction.That we were inside the chimney of a volcano there could no longer bethe shadow of a doubt. Nothing more terrible could be conceivedBut on this occasion instead of Sneffels an old and extinct volcanowe were inside a mountain of fire in full activity. Several times Ifound myself asking what mountain was it and on what part of the worldwe should be shot out. As if it were of any consequenceIn the northern regions there could be no reasonable doubt about that.Before it went decidedly mad the compass had never made the slightestmistake. From the cape of Saknussemm we had been swept away to thenorthward many hundreds of leagues. Now the question was were we oncemore under Icelandshould we be belched forth on to the earth throughthe crater of Mount Hecla or should we reappear through one of theother seven fire funnels of the island Taking in my mental vision aradius of five hundred leagues to the westward I could see under thisparallel only the littleknown volcanoes of the northwest coast ofAmerica.To the east one only existed somewhere about the eightieth degree oflatitude the Esk upon the island of Jan Mayen not far from the frozenregions of Spitsbergen.It was not craters that were wanting and many of them were big enoughto vomit a whole army all I wished to know was the particular onetowards which we were making with such fearful velocity.I often think now of my folly as if I should ever have expected toescapeTowards morning the ascending motion became greater and greater. If thedegree of heat increased instead of decreasing as we approached thesurface of the earth it was simply because the causes were local andwholly due to volcanic influence. Our very style of locomotion left inmy mind no doubt upon the subject. An enormous force a force of severalhundreds of atmospheres produced by the vapors accumulated and longcompressed in the interior of the earth was hoisting us upwards withirresistible power.But though we were approaching the light of day to what fearful dangerswere we about to be exposedInstant death appeared the only fate which we could expect orcontemplate.Soon a dim sepulchral light penetrated the vertical gallery whichbecame wider and wider. I could make out to the right and left long darkcorridors like immense tunnels from which awful and horrid vaporspoured out. Tongues of fire sparkling and crackling appeared about tolick us up.The hour had comeLook Uncle look I cried.Well what you see are the great sulphurous flames. Nothing more commonin connection with an eruption.But if they lap us round I angrily replied.They will not lap us round was his quiet and serene answer.But it will be all the same in the end if they stifle us I cried.We shall not be stifled. The gallery is rapidly becoming wider andwider and if it be necessary we will presently leave the raft and takerefuge in some fissure in the rock.But the water the water which is continually ascending Idespairingly replied.There is no longer any water Harry he answered but a kind of lavapaste which is heaving us up in company with itself to the mouth ofthe crater.In truth the liquid column of water had wholly disappeared to giveplace to dense masses of boiling eruptive matter. The temperature wasbecoming utterly insupportable and a thermometer exposed to thisatmosphere would have marked between one hundred and eightynine and onehundred ninety degrees Fahrenheit.Perspiration rushed from every pore. But for the extraordinary rapidityof our ascent we should have been stifled.Nevertheless the Professor did not carry out his proposition ofabandoning the raft and he did quite wisely. Those few illjoined beamsoffered anyway a solid surfacea support which elsewhere must haveutterly failed us.Towards eight oclock in the morning a new incident startled us. Theascensional movement suddenly ceased. The raft became still andmotionless.What is the matter now I said querulously very much startled bythis change.A simple halt replied my uncle.Is the eruption about to fail I asked.I hope not.Without making any reply I rose. I tried to look around me. Perhaps theraft checked by some projecting rock opposed a momentary resistance tothe eruptive mass. In this case it was absolutely necessary to releaseit as quickly as possible.Nothing of the kind had occurred. The column of cinders of scoriae ofbroken rocks and earth had wholly ceased to ascend.I tell you Uncle that the eruption has stopped was my oraculardecision.Ah said my uncle you think so my boy. You are wrong. Do not be inthe least alarmed this sudden moment of calm will not last long beassured. It has already endured five minutes and before we are manyminutes older we shall be continuing our journey to the mouth of thecrater.All the time he was speaking the Professor continued to consult hischronometer and he was probably right in his prognostics. Soon the raftresumed its motion in a very rapid and disorderly way which lasted twominutes or thereabout and then again it stopped as suddenly as before.Good said my uncle observing the hour in ten we shall startagain.In ten minutesYesprecisely. We have to do with a volcano the eruption of which isintermittent. We are compelled to breathe just as it does.Nothing could be more true. At the exact minute he had indicated wewere again launched on high with extreme rapidity. Not to be cast offthe raft it was necessary to hold on to the beams. Then the hoist againceased.Many times since have I thought of this singular phenomenon withoutbeing able to find for it any satisfactory explanation. Nevertheless itappeared quite clear to me that we were not in the principal chimney ofthe volcano but in an accessory conduit where we felt the countershock of the great and principal tunnel filled by burning lava.It is impossible for me to say how many times this maneuver wasrepeated. All that I can remember is that on every ascensional motionwe were hoisted up with ever increasing velocity as if we had beenlaunched from a huge projectile. During the sudden halts we were nearlystifled during the moments of projection the hot air took away ourbreath.I thought for a moment of the voluptuous joy of suddenly finding myselfin the hyperborean regions with the cold thirty degrees below zeroMy exalted imagination pictured to itself the vast snowy plains of thearctic regions and I was impatient to roll myself on the icy carpet ofthe North Pole.By degrees my head utterly overcome by a series of violent emotionsbegan to give way to hallucination. I was delirious. Had it not been forthe powerful arms of Hans the guide I should have broken my headagainst the granite masses of the shaft.I have in consequence kept no account of what followed for many hours.I have a vague and confused remembrance of continual detonations of theshaking of the huge granitic mass and of the raft going round like aspinning top. It floated on the stream of hot lava amidst a fallingcloud of cinders. The huge flames roaring wrapped us around.A storm of wind which appeared to be cast forth from an immenseventilator roused up the interior fires of the earth. It was a hotincandescent blastAt last I saw the figure of Hans as if enveloped in the huge halo ofburning blaze and no other sense remained to me but that sinister dreadwhich the condemned victim may be supposed to feel when led to the mouthof a cannon at the supreme moment when the shot is fired and his limbsare dispersed into empty space.CHAPTER DAYLIGHT AT LASTWhen I opened my eyes I felt the hand of the guide clutching me firmlyby the belt. With his other hand he supported my uncle. I was notgrievously wounded but bruised all over in the most remarkable manner.After a moment I looked around and found that I was lying down on theslope of a mountain not two yards from a yawning gulf into which Ishould have fallen had I made the slightest false step. Hans had savedme from death while I rolled insensible on the flanks of the crater.Where are we dreamily asked my uncle who literally appeared to bedisgusted at having returned to earth.The eiderdown hunter simply shrugged his shoulders as a mark of totalignorance.In Iceland said I not positively but interrogatively.Nej said Hans.How do you mean cried the Professor nowhat are your reasonsHans is wrong said I rising.After all the innumerable surprises of this journey a yet more singularone was reserved to us. I expected to see a cone covered by snow byextensive and widespread glaciers in the midst of the arid deserts ofthe extreme northern regions beneath the full rays of a polar skybeyond the highest latitudes.But contrary to all our expectations I my uncle and the Icelanderwere cast upon the slope of a mountain calcined by the burning rays of asun which was literally baking us with its fires.I could not believe my eyes but the actual heat which affected my bodyallowed me no chance of doubting. We came out of the crater half nakedand the radiant star from which we had asked nothing for two months wasgood enough to be prodigal to us of light and warmtha light and warmthwe could easily have dispensed with.When our eyes were accustomed to the light we had lost sight of so longI used them to rectify the errors of my imagination. Whatever happenedwe should have been at Spitsbergen and I was in no humor to yield toanything but the most absolute proof.After some delay the Professor spoke.Hem he said in a hesitating kind of way it really does not looklike Iceland.But supposing it were the island of Jan Mayen I ventured to observe.Not in the least my boy. This is not one of the volcanoes of thenorth with its hills of granite and its crown of snow.NeverthelessLook look my boy said the Professor as dogmatically as usual.Right above our heads at a great height opened the crater of a volcanofrom which escaped from one quarter of an hour to the other with avery loud explosion a lofty jet of flame mingled with pumice stonecinders and lava. I could feel the convulsions of nature in themountain which breathed like a huge whale throwing up from time totime fire and air through its enormous vents.Below and floating along a slope of considerable angularity the streamof eruptive matter spread away to a depth which did not give the volcanoa height of three hundred fathoms.Its base disappeared in a perfect forest of green trees among which Iperceived olives fig trees and vines loaded with rich grapes.Certainly this was not the ordinary aspect of the arctic regions. Aboutthat there could not be the slightest doubt.When the eye was satisfied at its glimpse of this verdant expanse itfell upon the waters of a lovely sea or beautiful lake which made ofthis enchanted land an island of not many leagues in extent.On the side of the rising sun was to be seen a little port crowded withhouses and near which the boats and vessels of peculiar build werefloating upon azure waves.Beyond groups of islands rose above the liquid plain so numerous andclose together as to resemble a vast beehive.Towards the setting sun some distant shores were to be made out on theedge of the horizon. Some presented the appearance of blue mountains ofharmonious conformation upon others much more distant there appeareda prodigiously lofty cone above the summit of which hung dark and heavyclouds.Towards the north an immense expanse of water sparkled beneath thesolar rays occasionally allowing the extremity of a mast or theconvexity of a sail bellying to the wind to be seen.The unexpected character of such a scene added a hundredfold to itsmarvelous beauties.Where can we be I asked speaking in a low and solemn voice.Hans shut his eyes with an air of indifference and my uncle looked onwithout clearly understanding.Whatever this mountain may be he said at last I must confess it israther warm. The explosions do not leave off and I do not think it isworthwhile to have left the interior of a volcano and remain here toreceive a huge piece of rock upon ones head. Let us carefully descendthe mountain and discover the real state of the case. To confess thetruth I am dying of hunger and thirst.Decidedly the Professor was no longer a truly reflective character. Formyself forgetting all my necessities ignoring my fatigues andsufferings I should have remained still for several hours longerbutit was necessary to follow my companions.The slope of the volcano was very steep and slippery we slid over pilesof ashes avoiding the streams of hot lava which glided about like fieryserpents. Still while we were advancing I spoke with extremevolubility for my imagination was too full not to explode in words.We are in Asia I exclaimed we are on the coast of India in thegreat Malay islands in the centre of Oceania. We have crossed the onehalf of the globe to come out right at the antipodes of EuropeBut the compass exclaimed my uncle explain that to meYesthe compass I said with considerable hesitation. I grant thatis a difficulty. According to it we have always been going northward.Then it lied.Hemto say it lied is rather a harsh word was my answer.Then we are at the North PoleThe Polenowellwell I give it up was my reply.The plain truth was that there was no explanation possible. I couldmake nothing of it.And all the while we were approaching this beautiful verdure hunger andthirst tormented me fearfully. Happily after two long hours march abeautiful country spread out before us covered by olives pomegranatesand vines which appeared to belong to anybody and everybody. In anyevent in the state of destitution into which we had fallen we were notin a mood to ponder too scrupulously.What delight it was to press these delicious fruits to our lips and tobite at grapes and pomegranates fresh from the vine.Not far off near some fresh and mossy grass under the delicious shadeof some trees I discovered a spring of fresh water in which wevoluptuously laved our faces hands and feet.While we were all giving way to the delights of newfound pleasures alittle child appeared between two tufted olive trees.Ah cried I an inhabitant of this happy country.The little fellow was poorly dressed weak and suffering and appearedterribly alarmed at our appearance. Halfnaked with tangled matted andragged beards we did look supremely illfavored and unless the countrywas a bandit land we were not likely to alarm the inhabitantsJust as the boy was about to take to his heels Hans ran after him andbrought him back despite his cries and kicks.My uncle tried to look as gentle as possible and then spoke in German.What is the name of this mountain my friendThe child made no reply.Good said my uncle with a very positive air of conviction we arenot in Germany.He then made the same demand in English of which language he was anexcellent scholar.The child shook its head and made no reply. I began to be considerablypuzzled.Is he dumb cried the Professor who was rather proud of his polyglotknowledge of languages and made the same demand in French.The boy only stared in his face.I must perforce try him in Italian said my uncle with a shrug.iDove noi siamoiYes tell me where we are I added impatiently and eagerly.Again the boy remained silent.My fine fellow do you or do you not mean to speak cried my unclewho began to get angry. He shook him and spoke another dialect of theItalian language.iCome si noma questa isolaiWhat is the name of this islandStromboli replied the rickety little shepherd dashing away from Hansand disappearing in the olive groves.We thought little enough about him.Stromboli What effect on the imagination did these few words produceWe were in the centre of the Mediterranean amidst the easternarchipelago of mythological memory in the ancient Strongylos whereAEolus kept the wind and the tempest chained up. And those bluemountains which rose towards the rising sun were the mountains ofCalabria.And that mighty volcano which rose on the southern horizon was Etna thefierce and celebrated EtnaStromboli Stromboli I repeated to myself.My uncle played a regular accompaniment to my gestures and words. Wewere singing together like an ancient chorus.Ahwhat a journeywhat a marvelous and extraordinary journey Here wehad entered the earth by one volcano and we had come out by another.And this other was situated more than twelve hundred leagues fromSneffels from that drear country of Iceland cast away on the confines ofthe earth. The wondrous changes of this expedition had transported us tothe most harmonious and beautiful of earthly lands. We had abandoned theregion of eternal snows for that of infinite verdure and had left overour heads the gray fog of the icy regions to come back to the azure skyof SicilyAfter a delicious repast of fruits and fresh water we again continuedour journey in order to reach the port of Stromboli. To say how we hadreached the island would scarcely have been prudent. The superstitiouscharacter of the Italians would have been at work and we should havebeen called demons vomited from the infernal regions. It was thereforenecessary to pass for humble and unfortunate shipwrecked travelers. Itwas certainly less striking and romantic but it was decidedly safer.As we advanced I could hear my worthy uncle muttering to himselfBut the compass. The compass most certainly marked north. This is afact I cannot explain in any way.Well the fact is said I with an air of disdain we must notexplain anything. It will be much more easy.I should like to see a professor of the Johanneum Institution who isunable to explain a cosmic phenomenonit would indeed be strange.And speaking thus my uncle halfnaked his leathern purse round hisloins and his spectacles upon his nose became once more the terribleProfessor of Mineralogy.An hour after leaving the wood of olives we reached the fort of SanVicenza where Hans demanded the price of his thirteenth week ofservice. My uncle paid him with very many warm shakes of the hand.At that moment if he did not indeed quite share our natural emotion heallowed his feelings so far to give way as to indulge in anextraordinary expression for him.With the tips of two fingers he gently pressed our hands and smiled.CHAPTER THE JOURNEY ENDEDThis is the final conclusion of a narrative which will be probablydisbelieved even by people who are astonished at nothing. I am howeverarmed at all points against human incredulity.We were kindly received by the Strombolite fishermen who treated us asshipwrecked travelers. They gave us clothes and food. After a delay offortyeight hours on the th of September a little vessel took us toMessina where a few days of delightful and complete repose restored usto ourselves.On Friday the th of October we embarked in the Volturne one of thepostal packets of the Imperial Messageries of France and three dayslater we landed at Marseilles having no other care on our minds butthat of our precious but erratic compass. This inexplicable circumstancetormented me terribly. On the th of October in the evening we reachedHamburg.What was the astonishment of Martha what the joy of Gretchen I willnot attempt to define it.Now then Harry that you really are a hero she said there is noreason why you should ever leave me again.I looked at her. She was weeping tears of joy.I leave it to be imagined if the return of Professor Hardwigg made ordid not make a sensation in Hamburg. Thanks to the indiscretion ofMartha the news of his departure for the interior of the earth had beenspread over the whole world.No one would believe itand when they saw him come back in safety theybelieved it all the less.But the presence of Hans and many stray scraps of information by degreesmodified public opinion.Then my uncle became a great man and I the nephew of a great man whichat all events is something. Hamburg gave a festival in our honor. Apublic meeting of the Johanneum Institution was held at which theProfessor related the whole story of his adventures omitting only thefacts in connection with the compass.That same day he deposited in the archives of the town the document hehad found written by Saknussemm and he expressed his great regret thatcircumstances stronger than his will did not allow him to follow theIcelandic travelers track into the very centre of the earth. He wasmodest in his glory but his reputation only increased.So much honor necessarily created for him many envious enemies. Ofcourse they existed and as his theories supported by certain factscontradicted the system of science upon the question of central heat hemaintained his own views both with pen and speech against the learned ofevery country. Although I still believe in the theory of central heat Iconfess that certain circumstances hitherto very ill defined maymodify the laws of such natural phenomena.At the moment when these questions were being discussed with interestmy uncle received a rude shockone that he felt very much. Hansdespite everything he could say to the contrary quitted Hamburg theman to whom we owed so much would not allow us to pay our deep debt ofgratitude. He was taken with nostalgia a love for his Icelandic home.Farval said he one day and with this one short word of adieu hestarted for Reykjavik which he soon reached in safety.We were deeply attached to our brave eiderduck hunter. His absence willnever cause him to be forgotten by those whose lives he saved and Ihope at some not distant day to see him again.To conclude I may say that our journey into the interior of the earthcreated an enormous sensation throughout the civilized world. It wastranslated and printed in many languages. All the leading journalspublished extracts from it which were commentated discussed attackedand supported with equal animation by those who believed in itsepisodes and by those who were utterly incredulous.Wonderful My uncle enjoyed during his lifetime all the glory hedeserved and he was even offered a large sum of money by Mr. Barnumto exhibit himself in the United States while I am credibly informed bya traveler that he is to be seen in waxwork at Madame TussaudsBut one care preyed upon his mind a care which rendered him veryunhappy. One fact remained inexplicablethat of the compass. For alearned man to be baffled by such an inexplicable phenomenon was veryaggravating. But Heaven was merciful and in the end my uncle was happy.One day while he put some minerals belonging to his collection inorder I fell upon the famous compass and examined it keenly.For six months it had lain unnoticed and untouched.I looked at it with curiosity which soon became surprise. I gave a loudcry. The Professor who was at hand soon joined me.What is the matter he cried.The compassWhat thenWhy its needle points to the south and not to the north.My dear boy you must be dreaming.I am not dreaming. Seethe poles are changed.ChangedMy uncle put on his spectacles examined the instrument and leaped withjoy shaking the whole house.A clear light fell upon our minds.Here it is he cried as soon as he had recovered the use of hisspeech after we had once passed Cape Saknussemm the needle of thiscompass pointed to the southward instead of the northward.Evidently.Our error is now easily explained. But to what phenomenon do we owethis alteration in the needleNothing more simple.Explain yourself my boy. I am on thorns.During the storm upon the Central Sea the ball of fire which made amagnet of the iron in our raft turned our compass topsyturvy.Ah cried the Professor with a loud and ringing laugh it was atrick of that inexplicable electricity.From that hour my uncle was the happiest of learned men and I thehappiest of ordinary mortals. For my pretty Virland girl abdicating herposition as ward took her place in the house in the Konigstrasse in thedouble quality of niece and wife.We need scarcely mention that her uncle was the illustrious ProfessorHardwigg corresponding member of all the scientific geographicalmineralogical and geological societies of the five parts of the globe.End of the Voyage Extraordinaire