A LETTER FROM CAPTAIN GULLIVER TO HIS COUSIN SYMPSON.Written in the Year .I hope you will be ready to own publicly whenever you shall be calledto it that by your great and frequent urgency you prevailed on me topublish a very loose and uncorrect account of my travels withdirections to hire some young gentleman of either university to putthem in order and correct the style as my cousin Dampier did by myadvice in his book called A Voyage round the world. But I do notremember I gave you power to consent that any thing should be omittedand much less that any thing should be inserted therefore as to thelatter I do here renounce every thing of that kind particularly aparagraph about her majesty Queen Anne of most pious and gloriousmemory although I did reverence and esteem her more than any of humanspecies. But you or your interpolator ought to have considered thatit was not my inclination so was it not decent to praise any animal ofour composition before my master Houyhnhnm And besides the fact wasaltogether false for to my knowledge being in England during somepart of her majestys reign she did govern by a chief minister nayeven by two successively the first whereof was the lord of Godolphinand the second the lord of Oxford so that you have made me say thething that was not. Likewise in the account of the academy ofprojectors and several passages of my discourse to my masterHouyhnhnm you have either omitted some material circumstances orminced or changed them in such a manner that I do hardly know my ownwork. When I formerly hinted to you something of this in a letter youwere pleased to answer that you were afraid of giving offence thatpeople in power were very watchful over the press and apt not only tointerpret but to punish every thing which looked like an innuendoas I think you call it. But pray how could that which I spoke somany years ago and at about five thousand leagues distance in anotherreign be applied to any of the Yahoos who now are said to governthe herd especially at a time when I little thought or feared theunhappiness of living under them Have not I the most reason tocomplain when I see these very Yahoos carried by Houyhnhnms in avehicle as if they were brutes and those the rational creatures Andindeed to avoid so monstrous and detestable a sight was one principalmotive of my retirement hither.Thus much I thought proper to tell you in relation to yourself and tothe trust I reposed in you.I do in the next place complain of my own great want of judgment inbeing prevailed upon by the entreaties and false reasoning of you andsome others very much against my own opinion to suffer my travels tobe published. Pray bring to your mind how often I desired you toconsider when you insisted on the motive of public good that theYahoos were a species of animals utterly incapable of amendment byprecept or example and so it has proved for instead of seeing a fullstop put to all abuses and corruptions at least in this little islandas I had reason to expect behold after above six months warning Icannot learn that my book has produced one single effect according tomy intentions. I desired you would let me know by a letter when partyand faction were extinguished judges learned and upright pleadershonest and modest with some tincture of common sense and Smithfieldblazing with pyramids of law books the young nobilitys educationentirely changed the physicians banished the female Yahoosabounding in virtue honour truth and good sense courts and leveesof great ministers thoroughly weeded and swept wit merit andlearning rewarded all disgracers of the press in prose and versecondemned to eat nothing but their own cotton and quench their thirstwith their own ink. These and a thousand other reformations I firmlycounted upon by your encouragement as indeed they were plainlydeducible from the precepts delivered in my book. And it must be ownedthat seven months were a sufficient time to correct every vice andfolly to which Yahoos are subject if their natures had been capableof the least disposition to virtue or wisdom. Yet so far have you beenfrom answering my expectation in any of your letters that on thecontrary you are loading our carrier every week with libels and keysand reflections and memoirs and second parts wherein I see myselfaccused of reflecting upon great state folk of degrading human naturefor so they have still the confidence to style it and of abusing thefemale sex. I find likewise that the writers of those bundles are notagreed among themselves for some of them will not allow me to be theauthor of my own travels and others make me author of books to which Iam wholly a stranger.I find likewise that your printer has been so careless as to confoundthe times and mistake the dates of my several voyages and returnsneither assigning the true year nor the true month nor day of themonth and I hear the original manuscript is all destroyed since thepublication of my book neither have I any copy left however I havesent you some corrections which you may insert if ever there shouldbe a second edition and yet I cannot stand to them but shall leavethat matter to my judicious and candid readers to adjust it as theyplease.I hear some of our sea Yahoos find fault with my sealanguage as notproper in many parts nor now in use. I cannot help it. In my firstvoyages while I was young I was instructed by the oldest marinersand learned to speak as they did. But I have since found that the seaYahoos are apt like the land ones to become newfangled in theirwords which the latter change every year insomuch as I remember uponeach return to my own country their old dialect was so altered that Icould hardly understand the new. And I observe when any Yahoo comesfrom London out of curiosity to visit me at my house we neither of usare able to deliver our conceptions in a manner intelligible to theother.If the censure of the Yahoos could any way affect me I should havegreat reason to complain that some of them are so bold as to think mybook of travels a mere fiction out of mine own brain and have gone sofar as to drop hints that the Houyhnhnms and Yahoos have no moreexistence than the inhabitants of Utopia.Indeed I must confess that as to the people of LilliputBrobdingrag for so the word should have been spelt and noterroneously Brobdingnag and Laputa I have never yet heard of anyYahoo so presumptuous as to dispute their being or the facts I haverelated concerning them because the truth immediately strikes everyreader with conviction. And is there less probability in my account ofthe Houyhnhnms or Yahoos when it is manifest as to the latterthere are so many thousands even in this country who only differ fromtheir brother brutes in Houyhnhnmland because they use a sort ofjabber and do not go naked I wrote for their amendment and not theirapprobation. The united praise of the whole race would be of lessconsequence to me than the neighing of those two degenerateHouyhnhnms I keep in my stable because from these degenerate asthey are I still improve in some virtues without any mixture of vice.Do these miserable animals presume to think that I am so degeneratedas to defend my veracity Yahoo as I am it is well known through allHouyhnhnmland that by the instructions and example of myillustrious master I was able in the compass of two years although Iconfess with the utmost difficulty to remove that infernal habit oflying shuffling deceiving and equivocating so deeply rooted in thevery souls of all my species especially the Europeans.I have other complaints to make upon this vexatious occasion but Iforbear troubling myself or you any further. I must freely confessthat since my last return some corruptions of my Yahoo nature haverevived in me by conversing with a few of your species andparticularly those of my own family by an unavoidable necessity elseI should never have attempted so absurd a project as that of reformingthe Yahoo race in this kingdom but I have now done with all suchvisionary schemes for ever.April PART I. A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT.CHAPTER I.The author gives some account of himself and family. His firstinducements to travel. He is shipwrecked and swims for his life getssafe on shore in the country of Lilliput is made a prisoner andcarried up the country.My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire I was the third offive sons. He sent me to Emanuel College in Cambridge at fourteen yearsold where I resided three years and applied myself close to mystudies but the charge of maintaining me although I had a very scantyallowance being too great for a narrow fortune I was bound apprenticeto Mr. James Bates an eminent surgeon in London with whom I continuedfour years. My father now and then sending me small sums of money Ilaid them out in learning navigation and other parts of themathematics useful to those who intend to travel as I always believedit would be some time or other my fortune to do. When I left Mr.Bates I went down to my father where by the assistance of him and myuncle John and some other relations I got forty pounds and a promiseof thirty pounds a year to maintain me at Leyden there I studiedphysic two years and seven months knowing it would be useful in longvoyages.Soon after my return from Leyden I was recommended by my good masterMr. Bates to be surgeon to the Swallow Captain Abraham Pannelcommander with whom I continued three years and a half making avoyage or two into the Levant and some other parts. When I came back Iresolved to settle in London to which Mr. Bates my master encouragedme and by him I was recommended to several patients. I took part of asmall house in the Old Jewry and being advised to alter my conditionI married Mrs. Mary Burton second daughter to Mr. Edmund Burtonhosier in Newgatestreet with whom I received four hundred pounds fora portion.But my good master Bates dying in two years after and I having fewfriends my business began to fail for my conscience would not sufferme to imitate the bad practice of too many among my brethren. Havingtherefore consulted with my wife and some of my acquaintance Idetermined to go again to sea. I was surgeon successively in two shipsand made several voyages for six years to the East and West Indiesby which I got some addition to my fortune. My hours of leisure I spentin reading the best authors ancient and modern being always providedwith a good number of books and when I was ashore in observing themanners and dispositions of the people as well as learning theirlanguage wherein I had a great facility by the strength of my memory.The last of these voyages not proving very fortunate I grew weary ofthe sea and intended to stay at home with my wife and family. Iremoved from the Old Jewry to Fetter Lane and from thence to Wappinghoping to get business among the sailors but it would not turn toaccount. After three years expectation that things would mend Iaccepted an advantageous offer from Captain William Prichard master ofthe Antelope who was making a voyage to the South Sea. We set sailfrom Bristol May and our voyage was at first very prosperous.It would not be proper for some reasons to trouble the reader withthe particulars of our adventures in those seas let it suffice toinform him that in our passage from thence to the East Indies we weredriven by a violent storm to the northwest of Van Diemens Land. By anobservation we found ourselves in the latitude of degrees minutessouth. Twelve of our crew were dead by immoderate labour and ill foodthe rest were in a very weak condition. On the th of November whichwas the beginning of summer in those parts the weather being veryhazy the seamen spied a rock within half a cables length of the shipbut the wind was so strong that we were driven directly upon it andimmediately split. Six of the crew of whom I was one having let downthe boat into the sea made a shift to get clear of the ship and therock. We rowed by my computation about three leagues till we wereable to work no longer being already spent with labour while we werein the ship. We therefore trusted ourselves to the mercy of the wavesand in about half an hour the boat was overset by a sudden flurry fromthe north. What became of my companions in the boat as well as ofthose who escaped on the rock or were left in the vessel I cannottell but conclude they were all lost. For my own part I swam asfortune directed me and was pushed forward by wind and tide. I oftenlet my legs drop and could feel no bottom but when I was almost goneand able to struggle no longer I found myself within my depth and bythis time the storm was much abated. The declivity was so small that Iwalked near a mile before I got to the shore which I conjectured wasabout eight oclock in the evening. I then advanced forward near half amile but could not discover any sign of houses or inhabitants atleast I was in so weak a condition that I did not observe them. I wasextremely tired and with that and the heat of the weather and abouthalf a pint of brandy that I drank as I left the ship I found myselfmuch inclined to sleep. I lay down on the grass which was very shortand soft where I slept sounder than ever I remembered to have done inmy life and as I reckoned about nine hours for when I awaked itwas just daylight. I attempted to rise but was not able to stir foras I happened to lie on my back I found my arms and legs were stronglyfastened on each side to the ground and my hair which was long andthick tied down in the same manner. I likewise felt several slenderligatures across my body from my armpits to my thighs. I could onlylook upwards the sun began to grow hot and the light offended myeyes. I heard a confused noise about me but in the posture I laycould see nothing except the sky. In a little time I felt somethingalive moving on my left leg which advancing gently forward over mybreast came almost up to my chin when bending my eyes downwards asmuch as I could I perceived it to be a human creature not six incheshigh with a bow and arrow in his hands and a quiver at his back. Inthe mean time I felt at least forty more of the same kind as Iconjectured following the first. I was in the utmost astonishment androared so loud that they all ran back in a fright and some of themas I was afterwards told were hurt with the falls they got by leapingfrom my sides upon the ground. However they soon returned and one ofthem who ventured so far as to get a full sight of my face lifting uphis hands and eyes by way of admiration cried out in a shrill butdistinct voice Hekinah degul the others repeated the same wordsseveral times but then I knew not what they meant. I lay all thiswhile as the reader may believe in great uneasiness. At lengthstruggling to get loose I had the fortune to break the strings andwrench out the pegs that fastened my left arm to the ground for bylifting it up to my face I discovered the methods they had taken tobind me and at the same time with a violent pull which gave meexcessive pain I a little loosened the strings that tied down my hairon the left side so that I was just able to turn my head about twoinches. But the creatures ran off a second time before I could seizethem whereupon there was a great shout in a very shrill accent andafter it ceased I heard one of them cry aloud Tolgo phonac when inan instant I felt above a hundred arrows discharged on my left handwhich pricked me like so many needles and besides they shot anotherflight into the air as we do bombs in Europe whereof many I supposefell on my body though I felt them not and some on my face which Iimmediately covered with my left hand. When this shower of arrows wasover I fell a groaning with grief and pain and then striving again toget loose they discharged another volley larger than the first andsome of them attempted with spears to stick me in the sides but bygood luck I had on a buff jerkin which they could not pierce. Ithought it the most prudent method to lie still and my design was tocontinue so till night when my left hand being already loose I couldeasily free myself and as for the inhabitants I had reason to believeI might be a match for the greatest army they could bring against meif they were all of the same size with him that I saw. But fortunedisposed otherwise of me. When the people observed I was quiet theydischarged no more arrows but by the noise I heard I knew theirnumbers increased and about four yards from me over against my rightear I heard a knocking for above an hour like that of people at workwhen turning my head that way as well as the pegs and strings wouldpermit me I saw a stage erected about a foot and a half from theground capable of holding four of the inhabitants with two or threeladders to mount it from whence one of them who seemed to be a personof quality made me a long speech whereof I understood not onesyllable. But I should have mentioned that before the principal personbegan his oration he cried out three times Langro dehul san thesewords and the former were afterwards repeated and explained to mewhereupon immediately about fifty of the inhabitants came and cut thestrings that fastened the left side of my head which gave me theliberty of turning it to the right and of observing the person andgesture of him that was to speak. He appeared to be of a middle ageand taller than any of the other three who attended him whereof onewas a page that held up his train and seemed to be somewhat longerthan my middle finger the other two stood one on each side to supporthim. He acted every part of an orator and I could observe many periodsof threatenings and others of promises pity and kindness. I answeredin a few words but in the most submissive manner lifting up my lefthand and both my eyes to the sun as calling him for a witness andbeing almost famished with hunger having not eaten a morsel for somehours before I left the ship I found the demands of nature so strongupon me that I could not forbear showing my impatience perhapsagainst the strict rules of decency by putting my finger frequently tomy mouth to signify that I wanted food. The hurgo for so they calla great lord as I afterwards learnt understood me very well. Hedescended from the stage and commanded that several ladders should beapplied to my sides on which above a hundred of the inhabitantsmounted and walked towards my mouth laden with baskets full of meatwhich had been provided and sent thither by the kings orders upon thefirst intelligence he received of me. I observed there was the flesh ofseveral animals but could not distinguish them by the taste. Therewere shoulders legs and loins shaped like those of mutton and verywell dressed but smaller than the wings of a lark. I ate them by twoor three at a mouthful and took three loaves at a time about thebigness of musket bullets. They supplied me as fast as they couldshowing a thousand marks of wonder and astonishment at my bulk andappetite. I then made another sign that I wanted drink. They found bymy eating that a small quantity would not suffice me and being a mostingenious people they slung up with great dexterity one of theirlargest hogsheads then rolled it towards my hand and beat out thetop I drank it off at a draught which I might well do for it did nothold half a pint and tasted like a small wine of Burgundy but muchmore delicious. They brought me a second hogshead which I drank in thesame manner and made signs for more but they had none to give me.When I had performed these wonders they shouted for joy and dancedupon my breast repeating several times as they did at first Hekinahdegul. They made me a sign that I should throw down the two hogsheadsbut first warning the people below to stand out of the way cryingaloud Borach mevolah and when they saw the vessels in the airthere was a universal shout of Hekinah degul. I confess I was oftentempted while they were passing backwards and forwards on my body toseize forty or fifty of the first that came in my reach and dash themagainst the ground. But the remembrance of what I had felt whichprobably might not be the worst they could do and the promise ofhonour I made themfor so I interpreted my submissive behavioursoondrove out these imaginations. Besides I now considered myself as boundby the laws of hospitality to a people who had treated me with so muchexpense and magnificence. However in my thoughts I could notsufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of these diminutive mortals whodurst venture to mount and walk upon my body while one of my hands wasat liberty without trembling at the very sight of so prodigious acreature as I must appear to them. After some time when they observedthat I made no more demands for meat there appeared before me a personof high rank from his imperial majesty. His excellency having mountedon the small of my right leg advanced forwards up to my face withabout a dozen of his retinue and producing his credentials under thesignet royal which he applied close to my eyes spoke about tenminutes without any signs of anger but with a kind of determinateresolution often pointing forwards which as I afterwards found wastowards the capital city about half a mile distant whither it wasagreed by his majesty in council that I must be conveyed. I answered infew words but to no purpose and made a sign with my hand that wasloose putting it to the other but over his excellencys head for fearof hurting him or his train and then to my own head and body tosignify that I desired my liberty. It appeared that he understood mewell enough for he shook his head by way of disapprobation and heldhis hand in a posture to show that I must be carried as a prisoner.However he made other signs to let me understand that I should havemeat and drink enough and very good treatment. Whereupon I once morethought of attempting to break my bonds but again when I felt thesmart of their arrows upon my face and hands which were all inblisters and many of the darts still sticking in them and observinglikewise that the number of my enemies increased I gave tokens to letthem know that they might do with me what they pleased. Upon this thehurgo and his train withdrew with much civility and cheerfulcountenances. Soon after I heard a general shout with frequentrepetitions of the words Peplom selan and I felt great numbers ofpeople on my left side relaxing the cords to such a degree that I wasable to turn upon my right and to ease myself with making water whichI very plentifully did to the great astonishment of the people whoconjecturing by my motion what I was going to do immediately opened tothe right and left on that side to avoid the torrent which fell withsuch noise and violence from me. But before this they had daubed myface and both my hands with a sort of ointment very pleasant to thesmell which in a few minutes removed all the smart of their arrows.These circumstances added to the refreshment I had received by theirvictuals and drink which were very nourishing disposed me to sleep. Islept about eight hours as I was afterwards assured and it was nowonder for the physicians by the emperors order had mingled asleepy potion in the hogsheads of wine.It seems that upon the first moment I was discovered sleeping on theground after my landing the emperor had early notice of it by anexpress and determined in council that I should be tied in the mannerI have related which was done in the night while I slept thatplenty of meat and drink should be sent to me and a machine preparedto carry me to the capital city.This resolution perhaps may appear very bold and dangerous and I amconfident would not be imitated by any prince in Europe on the likeoccasion. However in my opinion it was extremely prudent as well asgenerous for supposing these people had endeavoured to kill me withtheir spears and arrows while I was asleep I should certainly haveawaked with the first sense of smart which might so far have roused myrage and strength as to have enabled me to break the strings wherewithI was tied after which as they were not able to make resistance sothey could expect no mercy.These people are most excellent mathematicians and arrived to a greatperfection in mechanics by the countenance and encouragement of theemperor who is a renowned patron of learning. This prince has severalmachines fixed on wheels for the carriage of trees and other greatweights. He often builds his largest men of war whereof some are ninefeet long in the woods where the timber grows and has them carried onthese engines three or four hundred yards to the sea. Five hundredcarpenters and engineers were immediately set at work to prepare thegreatest engine they had. It was a frame of wood raised three inchesfrom the ground about seven feet long and four wide moving upontwentytwo wheels. The shout I heard was upon the arrival of thisengine which it seems set out in four hours after my landing. It wasbrought parallel to me as I lay. But the principal difficulty was toraise and place me in this vehicle. Eighty poles each of one foothigh were erected for this purpose and very strong cords of thebigness of packthread were fastened by hooks to many bandages whichthe workmen had girt round my neck my hands my body and my legs.Nine hundred of the strongest men were employed to draw up these cordsby many pulleys fastened on the poles and thus in less than threehours I was raised and slung into the engine and there tied fast. Allthis I was told for while the operation was performing I lay in aprofound sleep by the force of that soporiferous medicine infused intomy liquor. Fifteen hundred of the emperors largest horses each aboutfour inches and a half high were employed to draw me towards themetropolis which as I said was half a mile distant.About four hours after we began our journey I awaked by a veryridiculous accident for the carriage being stopped a while to adjustsomething that was out of order two or three of the young natives hadthe curiosity to see how I looked when I was asleep they climbed upinto the engine and advancing very softly to my face one of them anofficer in the guards put the sharp end of his halfpike a good way upinto my left nostril which tickled my nose like a straw and made mesneeze violently whereupon they stole off unperceived and it wasthree weeks before I knew the cause of my waking so suddenly. We made along march the remaining part of the day and rested at night withfive hundred guards on each side of me half with torches and halfwith bows and arrows ready to shoot me if I should offer to stir. Thenext morning at sunrise we continued our march and arrived within twohundred yards of the city gates about noon. The emperor and all hiscourt came out to meet us but his great officers would by no meanssuffer his majesty to endanger his person by mounting on my body.At the place where the carriage stopped there stood an ancient templeesteemed to be the largest in the whole kingdom which having beenpolluted some years before by an unnatural murder was according tothe zeal of those people looked upon as profane and therefore hadbeen applied to common use and all the ornaments and furniture carriedaway. In this edifice it was determined I should lodge. The great gatefronting to the north was about four feet high and almost two feetwide through which I could easily creep. On each side of the gate wasa small window not above six inches from the ground into that on theleft side the kings smith conveyed fourscore and eleven chains likethose that hang to a ladys watch in Europe and almost as large whichwere locked to my left leg with sixandthirty padlocks. Over againstthis temple on the other side of the great highway at twenty feetdistance there was a turret at least five feet high. Here the emperorascended with many principal lords of his court to have anopportunity of viewing me as I was told for I could not see them. Itwas reckoned that above a hundred thousand inhabitants came out of thetown upon the same errand and in spite of my guards I believe therecould not be fewer than ten thousand at several times who mounted mybody by the help of ladders. But a proclamation was soon issued toforbid it upon pain of death. When the workmen found it was impossiblefor me to break loose they cut all the strings that bound mewhereupon I rose up with as melancholy a disposition as ever I had inmy life. But the noise and astonishment of the people at seeing merise and walk are not to be expressed. The chains that held my leftleg were about two yards long and gave me not only the liberty ofwalking backwards and forwards in a semicircle but being fixed withinfour inches of the gate allowed me to creep in and lie at my fulllength in the temple.CHAPTER II.The emperor of Lilliput attended by several of the nobility comes tosee the author in his confinement. The emperors person and habitdescribed. Learned men appointed to teach the author their language. Hegains favour by his mild disposition. His pockets are searched and hissword and pistols taken from him.When I found myself on my feet I looked about me and must confess Inever beheld a more entertaining prospect. The country around appearedlike a continued garden and the enclosed fields which were generallyforty feet square resembled so many beds of flowers. These fields wereintermingled with woods of half a stang and the tallest treesas I could judge appeared to be seven feet high. I viewed the town onmy left hand which looked like the painted scene of a city in atheatre.I had been for some hours extremely pressed by the necessities ofnature which was no wonder it being almost two days since I had lastdisburdened myself. I was under great difficulties between urgency andshame. The best expedient I could think of was to creep into my housewhich I accordingly did and shutting the gate after me I went as faras the length of my chain would suffer and discharged my body of thatuneasy load. But this was the only time I was ever guilty of souncleanly an action for which I cannot but hope the candid reader willgive some allowance after he has maturely and impartially consideredmy case and the distress I was in. From this time my constant practicewas as soon as I rose to perform that business in open air at thefull extent of my chain and due care was taken every morning beforecompany came that the offensive matter should be carried off inwheelbarrows by two servants appointed for that purpose. I would nothave dwelt so long upon a circumstance that perhaps at first sightmay appear not very momentous if I had not thought it necessary tojustify my character in point of cleanliness to the world which Iam told some of my maligners have been pleased upon this and otheroccasions to call in question.When this adventure was at an end I came back out of my house havingoccasion for fresh air. The emperor was already descended from thetower and advancing on horseback towards me which had like to havecost him dear for the beast though very well trained yet whollyunused to such a sight which appeared as if a mountain moved beforehim reared up on its hinder feet but that prince who is an excellenthorseman kept his seat till his attendants ran in and held thebridle while his majesty had time to dismount. When he alighted hesurveyed me round with great admiration but kept beyond the length ofmy chain. He ordered his cooks and butlers who were already preparedto give me victuals and drink which they pushed forward in a sort ofvehicles upon wheels till I could reach them. I took these vehiclesand soon emptied them all twenty of them were filled with meat andten with liquor each of the former afforded me two or three goodmouthfuls and I emptied the liquor of ten vessels which was containedin earthen vials into one vehicle drinking it off at a draught andso I did with the rest. The empress and young princes of the blood ofboth sexes attended by many ladies sat at some distance in theirchairs but upon the accident that happened to the emperors horsethey alighted and came near his person which I am now going todescribe. He is taller by almost the breadth of my nail than any ofhis court which alone is enough to strike an awe into the beholders.His features are strong and masculine with an Austrian lip and archednose his complexion olive his countenance erect his body and limbswell proportioned all his motions graceful and his deportmentmajestic. He was then past his prime being twentyeight years andthree quarters old of which he had reigned about seven in greatfelicity and generally victorious. For the better convenience ofbeholding him I lay on my side so that my face was parallel to hisand he stood but three yards off however I have had him since manytimes in my hand and therefore cannot be deceived in the description.His dress was very plain and simple and the fashion of it between theAsiatic and the European but he had on his head a light helmet ofgold adorned with jewels and a plume on the crest. He held his sworddrawn in his hand to defend himself if I should happen to break looseit was almost three inches long the hilt and scabbard were goldenriched with diamonds. His voice was shrill but very clear andarticulate and I could distinctly hear it when I stood up. The ladiesand courtiers were all most magnificently clad so that the spot theystood upon seemed to resemble a petticoat spread upon the groundembroidered with figures of gold and silver. His imperial majesty spokeoften to me and I returned answers but neither of us could understanda syllable. There were several of his priests and lawyers present as Iconjectured by their habits who were commanded to address themselvesto me and I spoke to them in as many languages as I had the leastsmattering of which were High and Low Dutch Latin French SpanishItalian and Lingua Franca but all to no purpose. After about twohours the court retired and I was left with a strong guard to preventthe impertinence and probably the malice of the rabble who were veryimpatient to crowd about me as near as they durst and some of them hadthe impudence to shoot their arrows at me as I sat on the ground bythe door of my house whereof one very narrowly missed my left eye. Butthe colonel ordered six of the ringleaders to be seized and thought nopunishment so proper as to deliver them bound into my hands which someof his soldiers accordingly did pushing them forward with thebuttends of their pikes into my reach. I took them all in my righthand put five of them into my coatpocket and as to the sixth I madea countenance as if I would eat him alive. The poor man squalledterribly and the colonel and his officers were in much painespecially when they saw me take out my penknife but I soon put themout of fear for looking mildly and immediately cutting the stringshe was bound with I set him gently on the ground and away he ran. Itreated the rest in the same manner taking them one by one out of mypocket and I observed both the soldiers and people were highlydelighted at this mark of my clemency which was represented very muchto my advantage at court.Towards night I got with some difficulty into my house where I lay onthe ground and continued to do so about a fortnight during whichtime the emperor gave orders to have a bed prepared for me. Sixhundred beds of the common measure were brought in carriages andworked up in my house a hundred and fifty of their beds sewntogether made up the breadth and length and these were four doublewhich however kept me but very indifferently from the hardness of thefloor that was of smooth stone. By the same computation they providedme with sheets blankets and coverlets tolerable enough for one whohad been so long inured to hardships.As the news of my arrival spread through the kingdom it broughtprodigious numbers of rich idle and curious people to see me so thatthe villages were almost emptied and great neglect of tillage andhousehold affairs must have ensued if his imperial majesty had notprovided by several proclamations and orders of state against thisinconveniency. He directed that those who had already beheld me shouldreturn home and not presume to come within fifty yards of my housewithout license from the court whereby the secretaries of state gotconsiderable fees.In the mean time the emperor held frequent councils to debate whatcourse should be taken with me and I was afterwards assured by aparticular friend a person of great quality who was as much in thesecret as any that the court was under many difficulties concerningme. They apprehended my breaking loose that my diet would be veryexpensive and might cause a famine. Sometimes they determined tostarve me or at least to shoot me in the face and hands with poisonedarrows which would soon despatch me but again they considered thatthe stench of so large a carcass might produce a plague in themetropolis and probably spread through the whole kingdom. In the midstof these consultations several officers of the army went to the doorof the great councilchamber and two of them being admitted gave anaccount of my behaviour to the six criminals abovementioned whichmade so favourable an impression in the breast of his majesty and thewhole board in my behalf that an imperial commission was issued outobliging all the villages nine hundred yards round the city todeliver in every morning six beeves forty sheep and other victualsfor my sustenance together with a proportionable quantity of breadand wine and other liquors for the due payment of which his majestygave assignments upon his treasuryfor this prince lives chiefly uponhis own demesnes seldom except upon great occasions raising anysubsidies upon his subjects who are bound to attend him in his wars attheir own expense. An establishment was also made of six hundredpersons to be my domestics who had boardwages allowed for theirmaintenance and tents built for them very conveniently on each side ofmy door. It was likewise ordered that three hundred tailors shouldmake me a suit of clothes after the fashion of the country that sixof his majestys greatest scholars should be employed to instruct me intheir language and lastly that the emperors horses and those of thenobility and troops of guards should be frequently exercised in mysight to accustom themselves to me. All these orders were duly put inexecution and in about three weeks I made a great progress in learningtheir language during which time the emperor frequently honoured mewith his visits and was pleased to assist my masters in teaching me.We began already to converse together in some sort and the first wordsI learnt were to express my desire that he would please give me myliberty which I every day repeated on my knees. His answer as Icould comprehend it was that this must be a work of time not to bethought on without the advice of his council and that first I mustlumos kelmin pesso desmar lon emposo that is swear a peace withhim and his kingdom. However that I should be used with all kindness.And he advised me to acquire by my patience and discreet behaviourthe good opinion of himself and his subjects. He desired I would nottake it ill if he gave orders to certain proper officers to search mefor probably I might carry about me several weapons which must needsbe dangerous things if they answered the bulk of so prodigious aperson. I said His majesty should be satisfied for I was ready tostrip myself and turn up my pockets before him. This I delivered partin words and part in signs. He replied that by the laws of thekingdom I must be searched by two of his officers that he knew thiscould not be done without my consent and assistance and he had so goodan opinion of my generosity and justice as to trust their persons inmy hands that whatever they took from me should be returned when Ileft the country or paid for at the rate which I would set upon them.I took up the two officers in my hands put them first into mycoatpockets and then into every other pocket about me except my twofobs and another secret pocket which I had no mind should besearched wherein I had some little necessaries that were of noconsequence to any but myself. In one of my fobs there was a silverwatch and in the other a small quantity of gold in a purse. Thesegentlemen having pen ink and paper about them made an exactinventory of every thing they saw and when they had done desired Iwould set them down that they might deliver it to the emperor. Thisinventory I afterwards translated into English and is word for wordas followsImprimis In the right coatpocket of the great manmountain forso I interpret the words quinbus flestrin after the strictestsearch we found only one great piece of coarsecloth large enough tobe a footcloth for your majestys chief room of state. In the leftpocket we saw a huge silver chest with a cover of the same metalwhich we the searchers were not able to lift. We desired it should beopened and one of us stepping into it found himself up to the mid legin a sort of dust some part whereof flying up to our faces set us botha sneezing for several times together. In his right waistcoatpocket wefound a prodigious bundle of white thin substances folded one overanother about the bigness of three men tied with a strong cable andmarked with black figures which we humbly conceive to be writingsevery letter almost half as large as the palm of our hands. In the leftthere was a sort of engine from the back of which were extended twentylong poles resembling the pallisados before your majestys courtwherewith we conjecture the manmountain combs his head for we did notalways trouble him with questions because we found it a greatdifficulty to make him understand us. In the large pocket on the rightside of his middle cover so I translate the word ranfulo by whichthey meant my breeches we saw a hollow pillar of iron about thelength of a man fastened to a strong piece of timber larger than thepillar and upon one side of the pillar were huge pieces of ironsticking out cut into strange figures which we know not what to makeof. In the left pocket another engine of the same kind. In the smallerpocket on the right side were several round flat pieces of white andred metal of different bulk some of the white which seemed to besilver were so large and heavy that my comrade and I could hardlylift them. In the left pocket were two black pillars irregularlyshaped we could not without difficulty reach the top of them as westood at the bottom of his pocket. One of them was covered and seemedall of a piece but at the upper end of the other there appeared awhite round substance about twice the bigness of our heads. Withineach of these was enclosed a prodigious plate of steel which by ourorders we obliged him to show us because we apprehended they might bedangerous engines. He took them out of their cases and told us thatin his own country his practice was to shave his beard with one ofthese and cut his meat with the other. There were two pockets which wecould not enter these he called his fobs they were two large slitscut into the top of his middle cover but squeezed close by thepressure of his belly. Out of the right fob hung a great silver chainwith a wonderful kind of engine at the bottom. We directed him to drawout whatever was at the end of that chain which appeared to be aglobe half silver and half of some transparent metal for on thetransparent side we saw certain strange figures circularly drawn andthought we could touch them till we found our fingers stopped by thelucid substance. He put this engine into our ears which made anincessant noise like that of a watermill and we conjecture it iseither some unknown animal or the god that he worships but we aremore inclined to the latter opinion because he assured us if weunderstood him right for he expressed himself very imperfectly thathe seldom did any thing without consulting it. He called it his oracleand said it pointed out the time for every action of his life. Fromthe left fob he took out a net almost large enough for a fisherman butcontrived to open and shut like a purse and served him for the sameuse we found therein several massy pieces of yellow metal which ifthey be real gold must be of immense value.Having thus in obedience to your majestys commands diligentlysearched all his pockets we observed a girdle about his waist made ofthe hide of some prodigious animal from which on the left side hunga sword of the length of five men and on the right a bag or pouchdivided into two cells each cell capable of holding three of yourmajestys subjects. In one of these cells were several globes orballs of a most ponderous metal about the bigness of our heads andrequiring a strong hand to lift them the other cell contained a heapof certain black grains but of no great bulk or weight for we couldhold above fifty of them in the palms of our hands.This is an exact inventory of what we found about the body of themanmountain who used us with great civility and due respect to yourmajestys commission. Signed and sealed on the fourth day of theeightyninth moon of your majestys auspicious reign. Clefrin Frelock Marsi Frelock.When this inventory was read over to the emperor he directed mealthough in very gentle terms to deliver up the several particulars.He first called for my scimitar which I took out scabbard and all. Inthe mean time he ordered three thousand of his choicest troops whothen attended him to surround me at a distance with their bows andarrows just ready to discharge but I did not observe it for my eyeswere wholly fixed upon his majesty. He then desired me to draw myscimitar which although it had got some rust by the sea water wasin most parts exceeding bright. I did so and immediately all thetroops gave a shout between terror and surprise for the sun shoneclear and the reflection dazzled their eyes as I waved the scimitarto and fro in my hand. His majesty who is a most magnanimous princewas less daunted than I could expect he ordered me to return it intothe scabbard and cast it on the ground as gently as I could about sixfeet from the end of my chain. The next thing he demanded was one ofthe hollow iron pillars by which he meant my pocket pistols. I drew itout and at his desire as well as I could expressed to him the use ofit and charging it only with powder which by the closeness of mypouch happened to escape wetting in the sea an inconvenience againstwhich all prudent mariners take special care to provide I firstcautioned the emperor not to be afraid and then I let it off in theair. The astonishment here was much greater than at the sight of myscimitar. Hundreds fell down as if they had been struck dead and eventhe emperor although he stood his ground could not recover himselffor some time. I delivered up both my pistols in the same manner as Ihad done my scimitar and then my pouch of powder and bullets begginghim that the former might be kept from fire for it would kindle withthe smallest spark and blow up his imperial palace into the air. Ilikewise delivered up my watch which the emperor was very curious tosee and commanded two of his tallest yeomen of the guards to bear iton a pole upon their shoulders as draymen in England do a barrel ofale. He was amazed at the continual noise it made and the motion ofthe minutehand which he could easily discern for their sight is muchmore acute than ours he asked the opinions of his learned men aboutit which were various and remote as the reader may well imaginewithout my repeating although indeed I could not very perfectlyunderstand them. I then gave up my silver and copper money my pursewith nine large pieces of gold and some smaller ones my knife andrazor my comb and silver snuffbox my handkerchief and journalbook.My scimitar pistols and pouch were conveyed in carriages to hismajestys stores but the rest of my goods were returned me.I had as I before observed one private pocket which escaped theirsearch wherein there was a pair of spectacles which I sometimes usefor the weakness of my eyes a pocket perspective and some otherlittle conveniences which being of no consequence to the emperor Idid not think myself bound in honour to discover and I apprehendedthey might be lost or spoiled if I ventured them out of my possession.CHAPTER III.The author diverts the emperor and his nobility of both sexes in avery uncommon manner. The diversions of the court of Lilliputdescribed. The author has his liberty granted him upon certainconditions.My gentleness and good behaviour had gained so far on the emperor andhis court and indeed upon the army and people in general that I beganto conceive hopes of getting my liberty in a short time. I took allpossible methods to cultivate this favourable disposition. The nativescame by degrees to be less apprehensive of any danger from me. Iwould sometimes lie down and let five or six of them dance on my handand at last the boys and girls would venture to come and play athideandseek in my hair. I had now made a good progress inunderstanding and speaking the language. The emperor had a mind one dayto entertain me with several of the country shows wherein they exceedall nations I have known both for dexterity and magnificence. I wasdiverted with none so much as that of the ropedancers performed upona slender white thread extended about two feet and twelve inches fromthe ground. Upon which I shall desire liberty with the readerspatience to enlarge a little.This diversion is only practised by those persons who are candidatesfor great employments and high favour at court. They are trained inthis art from their youth and are not always of noble birth orliberal education. When a great office is vacant either by death ordisgrace which often happens five or six of those candidatespetition the emperor to entertain his majesty and the court with adance on the rope and whoever jumps the highest without fallingsucceeds in the office. Very often the chief ministers themselves arecommanded to show their skill and to convince the emperor that theyhave not lost their faculty. Flimnap the treasurer is allowed to cuta caper on the straight rope at least an inch higher than any otherlord in the whole empire. I have seen him do the summerset severaltimes together upon a trencher fixed on a rope which is no thickerthan a common packthread in England. My friend Reldresal principalsecretary for private affairs is in my opinion if I am not partialthe second after the treasurer the rest of the great officers are muchupon a par.These diversions are often attended with fatal accidents whereof greatnumbers are on record. I myself have seen two or three candidates breaka limb. But the danger is much greater when the ministers themselvesare commanded to show their dexterity for by contending to excelthemselves and their fellows they strain so far that there is hardlyone of them who has not received a fall and some of them two or three.I was assured that a year or two before my arrival Flimnap wouldinfallibly have broke his neck if one of the kings cushions thataccidentally lay on the ground had not weakened the force of his fall.There is likewise another diversion which is only shown before theemperor and empress and first minister upon particular occasions. Theemperor lays on the table three fine silken threads of six inches longone is blue the other red and the third green. These threads areproposed as prizes for those persons whom the emperor has a mind todistinguish by a peculiar mark of his favour. The ceremony is performedin his majestys great chamber of state where the candidates are toundergo a trial of dexterity very different from the former and suchas I have not observed the least resemblance of in any other country ofthe new or old world. The emperor holds a stick in his hands both endsparallel to the horizon while the candidates advancing one by onesometimes leap over the stick sometimes creep under it backward andforward several times according as the stick is advanced ordepressed. Sometimes the emperor holds one end of the stick and hisfirst minister the other sometimes the minister has it entirely tohimself. Whoever performs his part with most agility and holds out thelongest in leaping and creeping is rewarded with the bluecolouredsilk the red is given to the next and the green to the third whichthey all wear girt twice round about the middle and you see few greatpersons about this court who are not adorned with one of these girdles.The horses of the army and those of the royal stables having beendaily led before me were no longer shy but would come up to my veryfeet without starting. The riders would leap them over my hand as Iheld it on the ground and one of the emperors huntsmen upon a largecourser took my foot shoe and all which was indeed a prodigiousleap. I had the good fortune to divert the emperor one day after a veryextraordinary manner. I desired he would order several sticks of twofeet high and the thickness of an ordinary cane to be brought mewhereupon his majesty commanded the master of his woods to givedirections accordingly and the next morning six woodmen arrived withas many carriages drawn by eight horses to each. I took nine of thesesticks and fixing them firmly in the ground in a quadrangular figuretwo feet and a half square I took four other sticks and tied themparallel at each corner about two feet from the ground then Ifastened my handkerchief to the nine sticks that stood erect andextended it on all sides till it was tight as the top of a drum andthe four parallel sticks rising about five inches higher than thehandkerchief served as ledges on each side. When I had finished mywork I desired the emperor to let a troop of his best horsestwentyfour in number come and exercise upon this plain. His majestyapproved of the proposal and I took them up one by one in my handsready mounted and armed with the proper officers to exercise them. Assoon as they got into order they divided into two parties performedmock skirmishes discharged blunt arrows drew their swords fled andpursued attacked and retired and in short discovered the bestmilitary discipline I ever beheld. The parallel sticks secured them andtheir horses from falling over the stage and the emperor was so muchdelighted that he ordered this entertainment to be repeated severaldays and once was pleased to be lifted up and give the word ofcommand and with great difficulty persuaded even the empress herselfto let me hold her in her close chair within two yards of the stagewhen she was able to take a full view of the whole performance. It wasmy good fortune that no ill accident happened in these entertainmentsonly once a fiery horse that belonged to one of the captains pawingwith his hoof struck a hole in my handkerchief and his foot slippinghe overthrew his rider and himself but I immediately relieved themboth and covering the hole with one hand I set down the troop withthe other in the same manner as I took them up. The horse that fellwas strained in the left shoulder but the rider got no hurt and Irepaired my handkerchief as well as I could however I would not trustto the strength of it any more in such dangerous enterprises.About two or three days before I was set at liberty as I wasentertaining the court with this kind of feat there arrived an expressto inform his majesty that some of his subjects riding near the placewhere I was first taken up had seen a great black substance lying onthe ground very oddly shaped extending its edges round as wide ashis majestys bedchamber and rising up in the middle as high as a manthat it was no living creature as they at first apprehended for itlay on the grass without motion and some of them had walked round itseveral times that by mounting upon each others shoulders they hadgot to the top which was flat and even and stamping upon it theyfound that it was hollow within that they humbly conceived it might besomething belonging to the manmountain and if his majesty pleasedthey would undertake to bring it with only five horses. I presentlyknew what they meant and was glad at heart to receive thisintelligence. It seems upon my first reaching the shore after ourshipwreck I was in such confusion that before I came to the placewhere I went to sleep my hat which I had fastened with a string to myhead while I was rowing and had stuck on all the time I was swimmingfell off after I came to land the string as I conjecture breaking bysome accident which I never observed but thought my hat had been lostat sea. I entreated his imperial majesty to give orders it might bebrought to me as soon as possible describing to him the use and thenature of it and the next day the waggoners arrived with it but notin a very good condition they had bored two holes in the brim withinan inch and half of the edge and fastened two hooks in the holesthese hooks were tied by a long cord to the harness and thus my hatwas dragged along for above half an English mile but the ground inthat country being extremely smooth and level it received less damagethan I expected.Two days after this adventure the emperor having ordered that part ofhis army which quarters in and about his metropolis to be inreadiness took a fancy of diverting himself in a very singular manner.He desired I would stand like a Colossus with my legs as far asunderas I conveniently could. He then commanded his general who was an oldexperienced leader and a great patron of mine to draw up the troopsin close order and march them under me the foot by twentyfourabreast and the horse by sixteen with drums beating colours flyingand pikes advanced. This body consisted of three thousand foot and athousand horse. His majesty gave orders upon pain of death that everysoldier in his march should observe the strictest decency with regardto my person which however could not prevent some of the youngerofficers from turning up their eyes as they passed under me and toconfess the truth my breeches were at that time in so ill a conditionthat they afforded some opportunities for laughter and admiration.I had sent so many memorials and petitions for my liberty that hismajesty at length mentioned the matter first in the cabinet and thenin a full council where it was opposed by none except SkyreshBolgolam who was pleased without any provocation to be my mortalenemy. But it was carried against him by the whole board and confirmedby the emperor. That minister was galbet or admiral of the realmvery much in his masters confidence and a person well versed inaffairs but of a morose and sour complexion. However he was at lengthpersuaded to comply but prevailed that the articles and conditionsupon which I should be set free and to which I must swear should bedrawn up by himself. These articles were brought to me by SkyreshBolgolam in person attended by two undersecretaries and severalpersons of distinction. After they were read I was demanded to swearto the performance of them first in the manner of my own country andafterwards in the method prescribed by their laws which was to holdmy right foot in my left hand and to place the middle finger of myright hand on the crown of my head and my thumb on the tip of my rightear. But because the reader may be curious to have some idea of thestyle and manner of expression peculiar to that people as well as toknow the article upon which I recovered my liberty I have made atranslation of the whole instrument word for word as near as I wasable which I here offer to the public.Golbasto Momarem Evlame Gurdilo Shefin Mully Ully Gue most mightyEmperor of Lilliput delight and terror of the universe whosedominions extend five thousand blustrugs about twelve miles incircumference to the extremities of the globe monarch of allmonarchs taller than the sons of men whose feet press down to thecentre and whose head strikes against the sun at whose nod theprinces of the earth shake their knees pleasant as the springcomfortable as the summer fruitful as autumn dreadful as winter hismost sublime majesty proposes to the manmountain lately arrived atour celestial dominions the following articles which by a solemnoath he shall be obliged to performst The manmountain shall not depart from our dominions without ourlicense under our great seal.d He shall not presume to come into our metropolis without ourexpress order at which time the inhabitants shall have two hourswarning to keep within doors.d The said manmountain shall confine his walks to our principalhigh roads and not offer to walk or lie down in a meadow or field ofcorn.th As he walks the said roads he shall take the utmost care not totrample upon the bodies of any of our loving subjects their horses orcarriages nor take any of our subjects into his hands without theirown consent.th If an express requires extraordinary despatch the manmountainshall be obliged to carry in his pocket the messenger and horse a sixdays journey once in every moon and return the said messenger backif so required safe to our imperial presence.th He shall be our ally against our enemies in the island ofBlefuscu and do his utmost to destroy their fleet which is nowpreparing to invade us.th That the said manmountain shall at his times of leisure beaiding and assisting to our workmen in helping to raise certain greatstones towards covering the wall of the principal park and other ourroyal buildings.th That the said manmountain shall in two moons time deliver inan exact survey of the circumference of our dominions by a computationof his own paces round the coast.Lastly That upon his solemn oath to observe all the above articlesthe said manmountain shall have a daily allowance of meat and drinksufficient for the support of of our subjects with free access toour royal person and other marks of our favour. Given at our palace atBelfaborac the twelfth day of the ninetyfirst moon of our reign.I swore and subscribed to these articles with great cheerfulness andcontent although some of them were not so honourable as I could havewished which proceeded wholly from the malice of Skyresh Bolgolam thehighadmiral whereupon my chains were immediately unlocked and I wasat full liberty. The emperor himself in person did me the honour tobe by at the whole ceremony. I made my acknowledgements by prostratingmyself at his majestys feet but he commanded me to rise and aftermany gracious expressions which to avoid the censure of vanity Ishall not repeat he added that he hoped I should prove a usefulservant and well deserve all the favours he had already conferred uponme or might do for the future.The reader may please to observe that in the last article of therecovery of my liberty the emperor stipulates to allow me a quantityof meat and drink sufficient for the support of Lilliputians. Sometime after asking a friend at court how they came to fix on thatdeterminate number he told me that his majestys mathematicianshaving taken the height of my body by the help of a quadrant andfinding it to exceed theirs in the proportion of twelve to one theyconcluded from the similarity of their bodies that mine must containat least of theirs and consequently would require as much food aswas necessary to support that number of Lilliputians. By which thereader may conceive an idea of the ingenuity of that people as well asthe prudent and exact economy of so great a prince.CHAPTER IV.Mildendo the metropolis of Lilliput described together with theemperors palace. A conversation between the author and a principalsecretary concerning the affairs of that empire. The authors offersto serve the emperor in his wars.The first request I made after I had obtained my liberty was that Imight have license to see Mildendo the metropolis which the emperoreasily granted me but with a special charge to do no hurt either tothe inhabitants or their houses. The people had notice byproclamation of my design to visit the town. The wall whichencompassed it is two feet and a half high and at least eleven inchesbroad so that a coach and horses may be driven very safely round itand it is flanked with strong towers at ten feet distance. I steppedover the great western gate and passed very gently and sidlingthrough the two principal streets only in my short waistcoat for fearof damaging the roofs and eaves of the houses with the skirts of mycoat. I walked with the utmost circumspection to avoid treading on anystragglers who might remain in the streets although the orders werevery strict that all people should keep in their houses at their ownperil. The garret windows and tops of houses were so crowded withspectators that I thought in all my travels I had not seen a morepopulous place. The city is an exact square each side of the wallbeing five hundred feet long. The two great streets which run acrossand divide it into four quarters are five feet wide. The lanes andalleys which I could not enter but only view them as I passed arefrom twelve to eighteen inches. The town is capable of holding fivehundred thousand souls the houses are from three to five stories theshops and markets well provided.The emperors palace is in the centre of the city where the two greatstreets meet. It is enclosed by a wall of two feet high and twentyfeet distance from the buildings. I had his majestys permission tostep over this wall and the space being so wide between that and thepalace I could easily view it on every side. The outward court is asquare of forty feet and includes two other courts in the inmost arethe royal apartments which I was very desirous to see but found itextremely difficult for the great gates from one square into anotherwere but eighteen inches high and seven inches wide. Now the buildingsof the outer court were at least five feet high and it was impossiblefor me to stride over them without infinite damage to the pile thoughthe walls were strongly built of hewn stone and four inches thick. Atthe same time the emperor had a great desire that I should see themagnificence of his palace but this I was not able to do till threedays after which I spent in cutting down with my knife some of thelargest trees in the royal park about a hundred yards distant from thecity. Of these trees I made two stools each about three feet high andstrong enough to bear my weight. The people having received notice asecond time I went again through the city to the palace with my twostools in my hands. When I came to the side of the outer court I stoodupon one stool and took the other in my hand this I lifted over theroof and gently set it down on the space between the first and secondcourt which was eight feet wide. I then stept over the building veryconveniently from one stool to the other and drew up the first afterme with a hooked stick. By this contrivance I got into the inmostcourt and lying down upon my side I applied my face to the windowsof the middle stories which were left open on purpose and discoveredthe most splendid apartments that can be imagined. There I saw theempress and the young princes in their several lodgings with theirchief attendants about them. Her imperial majesty was pleased to smilevery graciously upon me and gave me out of the window her hand tokiss.But I shall not anticipate the reader with further descriptions of thiskind because I reserve them for a greater work which is now almostready for the press containing a general description of this empirefrom its first erection through a long series of princes with aparticular account of their wars and politics laws learning andreligion their plants and animals their peculiar manners and customswith other matters very curious and useful my chief design at presentbeing only to relate such events and transactions as happened to thepublic or to myself during a residence of about nine months in thatempire.One morning about a fortnight after I had obtained my libertyReldresal principal secretary as they style him for private affairscame to my house attended only by one servant. He ordered his coach towait at a distance and desired I would give him an hours audiencewhich I readily consented to on account of his quality and personalmerits as well as of the many good offices he had done me during mysolicitations at court. I offered to lie down that he might the moreconveniently reach my ear but he chose rather to let me hold him in myhand during our conversation. He began with compliments on my libertysaid he might pretend to some merit in it but however added thatif it had not been for the present situation of things at courtperhaps I might not have obtained it so soon. For said he asflourishing a condition as we may appear to be in to foreigners welabour under two mighty evils a violent faction at home and thedanger of an invasion by a most potent enemy from abroad. As to thefirst you are to understand that for about seventy moons past therehave been two struggling parties in this empire under the names ofTramecksan and Slamecksan from the high and low heels of theirshoes by which they distinguish themselves. It is alleged indeedthat the high heels are most agreeable to our ancient constitutionbut however this be his majesty has determined to make use only oflow heels in the administration of the government and all offices inthe gift of the crown as you cannot but observe and particularly thathis majestys imperial heels are lower at least by a drurr than anyof his court drurr is a measure about the fourteenth part of aninch. The animosities between these two parties run so high that theywill neither eat nor drink nor talk with each other. We compute theTramecksan or high heels to exceed us in number but the power iswholly on our side. We apprehend his imperial highness the heir to thecrown to have some tendency towards the high heels at least we canplainly discover that one of his heels is higher than the other whichgives him a hobble in his gait. Now in the midst of these intestinedisquiets we are threatened with an invasion from the island ofBlefuscu which is the other great empire of the universe almost aslarge and powerful as this of his majesty. For as to what we have heardyou affirm that there are other kingdoms and states in the worldinhabited by human creatures as large as yourself our philosophers arein much doubt and would rather conjecture that you dropped from themoon or one of the stars because it is certain that a hundredmortals of your bulk would in a short time destroy all the fruits andcattle of his majestys dominions besides our histories of sixthousand moons make no mention of any other regions than the two greatempires of Lilliput and Blefuscu. Which two mighty powers have as Iwas going to tell you been engaged in a most obstinate war forsixandthirty moons past. It began upon the following occasion. It isallowed on all hands that the primitive way of breaking eggs beforewe eat them was upon the larger end but his present majestysgrandfather while he was a boy going to eat an egg and breaking itaccording to the ancient practice happened to cut one of his fingers.Whereupon the emperor his father published an edict commanding all hissubjects upon great penalties to break the smaller end of their eggs.The people so highly resented this law that our histories tell usthere have been six rebellions raised on that account wherein oneemperor lost his life and another his crown. These civil commotionswere constantly fomented by the monarchs of Blefuscu and when theywere quelled the exiles always fled for refuge to that empire. It iscomputed that eleven thousand persons have at several times suffereddeath rather than submit to break their eggs at the smaller end. Manyhundred large volumes have been published upon this controversy butthe books of the Bigendians have been long forbidden and the wholeparty rendered incapable by law of holding employments. During thecourse of these troubles the emperors of Blefuscu did frequentlyexpostulate by their ambassadors accusing us of making a schism inreligion by offending against a fundamental doctrine of our greatprophet Lustrog in the fiftyfourth chapter of the Blundecral whichis their Alcoran. This however is thought to be a mere strain uponthe text for the words are these that all true believers break theireggs at the convenient end. And which is the convenient end seems inmy humble opinion to be left to every mans conscience or at least inthe power of the chief magistrate to determine. Now the Bigendianexiles have found so much credit in the emperor of Blefuscus courtand so much private assistance and encouragement from their party hereat home that a bloody war has been carried on between the two empiresfor sixandthirty moons with various success during which time wehave lost forty capital ships and a much greater number of smallervessels together with thirty thousand of our best seamen and soldiersand the damage received by the enemy is reckoned to be somewhat greaterthan ours. However they have now equipped a numerous fleet and arejust preparing to make a descent upon us and his imperial majestyplacing great confidence in your valour and strength has commanded meto lay this account of his affairs before you.I desired the secretary to present my humble duty to the emperor andto let him know that I thought it would not become me who was aforeigner to interfere with parties but I was ready with the hazardof my life to defend his person and state against all invaders.CHAPTER V.The author by an extraordinary stratagem prevents an invasion. A hightitle of honour is conferred upon him. Ambassadors arrive from theemperor of Blefuscu and sue for peace. The empresss apartment on fireby an accident the author instrumental in saving the rest of thepalace.The empire of Blefuscu is an island situated to the northeast ofLilliput from which it is parted only by a channel of eight hundredyards wide. I had not yet seen it and upon this notice of an intendedinvasion I avoided appearing on that side of the coast for fear ofbeing discovered by some of the enemys ships who had received nointelligence of me all intercourse between the two empires having beenstrictly forbidden during the war upon pain of death and an embargolaid by our emperor upon all vessels whatsoever. I communicated to hismajesty a project I had formed of seizing the enemys whole fleetwhich as our scouts assured us lay at anchor in the harbour ready tosail with the first fair wind. I consulted the most experienced seamenupon the depth of the channel which they had often plumbed who toldme that in the middle at highwater it was seventy glumgluffsdeep which is about six feet of European measure and the rest of itfifty glumgluffs at most. I walked towards the northeast coast overagainst Blefuscu where lying down behind a hillock I took out mysmall perspective glass and viewed the enemys fleet at anchorconsisting of about fifty men of war and a great number of transportsI then came back to my house and gave orders for which I had awarrant for a great quantity of the strongest cable and bars of iron.The cable was about as thick as packthread and the bars of the lengthand size of a knittingneedle. I trebled the cable to make it strongerand for the same reason I twisted three of the iron bars togetherbending the extremities into a hook. Having thus fixed fifty hooks toas many cables I went back to the northeast coast and putting off mycoat shoes and stockings walked into the sea in my leathern jerkinabout half an hour before high water. I waded with what haste I couldand swam in the middle about thirty yards till I felt ground. Iarrived at the fleet in less than half an hour. The enemy was sofrightened when they saw me that they leaped out of their ships andswam to shore where there could not be fewer than thirty thousandsouls. I then took my tackling and fastening a hook to the hole atthe prow of each I tied all the cords together at the end. While I wasthus employed the enemy discharged several thousand arrows many ofwhich stuck in my hands and face and beside the excessive smart gaveme much disturbance in my work. My greatest apprehension was for myeyes which I should have infallibly lost if I had not suddenlythought of an expedient. I kept among other little necessaries a pairof spectacles in a private pocket which as I observed before hadescaped the emperors searchers. These I took out and fastened asstrongly as I could upon my nose and thus armed went on boldly withmy work in spite of the enemys arrows many of which struck againstthe glasses of my spectacles but without any other effect furtherthan a little to discompose them. I had now fastened all the hooksand taking the knot in my hand began to pull but not a ship wouldstir for they were all too fast held by their anchors so that theboldest part of my enterprise remained. I therefore let go the cordand leaving the hooks fixed to the ships I resolutely cut with myknife the cables that fastened the anchors receiving about two hundredshots in my face and hands then I took up the knotted end of thecables to which my hooks were tied and with great ease drew fifty ofthe enemys largest men of war after me.The Blefuscudians who had not the least imagination of what Iintended were at first confounded with astonishment. They had seen mecut the cables and thought my design was only to let the ships runadrift or fall foul on each other but when they perceived the wholefleet moving in order and saw me pulling at the end they set up sucha scream of grief and despair as it is almost impossible to describe orconceive. When I had got out of danger I stopped awhile to pick outthe arrows that stuck in my hands and face and rubbed on some of thesame ointment that was given me at my first arrival as I have formerlymentioned. I then took off my spectacles and waiting about an hourtill the tide was a little fallen I waded through the middle with mycargo and arrived safe at the royal port of Lilliput.The emperor and his whole court stood on the shore expecting the issueof this great adventure. They saw the ships move forward in a largehalfmoon but could not discern me who was up to my breast in water.When I advanced to the middle of the channel they were yet more inpain because I was under water to my neck. The emperor concluded me tobe drowned and that the enemys fleet was approaching in a hostilemanner but he was soon eased of his fears for the channel growingshallower every step I made I came in a short time within hearing andholding up the end of the cable by which the fleet was fastened Icried in a loud voice Long live the most puissant king of LilliputThis great prince received me at my landing with all possibleencomiums and created me a nardac upon the spot which is thehighest title of honour among them.His majesty desired I would take some other opportunity of bringing allthe rest of his enemys ships into his ports. And so unmeasureable isthe ambition of princes that he seemed to think of nothing less thanreducing the whole empire of Blefuscu into a province and governingit by a viceroy of destroying the Bigendian exiles and compellingthat people to break the smaller end of their eggs by which he wouldremain the sole monarch of the whole world. But I endeavoured to diverthim from this design by many arguments drawn from the topics of policyas well as justice and I plainly protested that I would never be aninstrument of bringing a free and brave people into slavery. And whenthe matter was debated in council the wisest part of the ministry wereof my opinion.This open bold declaration of mine was so opposite to the schemes andpolitics of his imperial majesty that he could never forgive me. Hementioned it in a very artful manner at council where I was told thatsome of the wisest appeared at least by their silence to be of myopinion but others who were my secret enemies could not forbear someexpressions which by a sidewind reflected on me. And from this timebegan an intrigue between his majesty and a junto of ministersmaliciously bent against me which broke out in less than two monthsand had like to have ended in my utter destruction. Of so little weightare the greatest services to princes when put into the balance with arefusal to gratify their passions.About three weeks after this exploit there arrived a solemn embassyfrom Blefuscu with humble offers of a peace which was soon concludedupon conditions very advantageous to our emperor wherewith I shall nottrouble the reader. There were six ambassadors with a train of aboutfive hundred persons and their entry was very magnificent suitable tothe grandeur of their master and the importance of their business.When their treaty was finished wherein I did them several good officesby the credit I now had or at least appeared to have at court theirexcellencies who were privately told how much I had been their friendmade me a visit in form. They began with many compliments upon myvalour and generosity invited me to that kingdom in the emperor theirmasters name and desired me to show them some proofs of my prodigiousstrength of which they had heard so many wonders wherein I readilyobliged them but shall not trouble the reader with the particulars.When I had for some time entertained their excellencies to theirinfinite satisfaction and surprise I desired they would do me thehonour to present my most humble respects to the emperor their masterthe renown of whose virtues had so justly filled the whole world withadmiration and whose royal person I resolved to attend before Ireturned to my own country. Accordingly the next time I had the honourto see our emperor I desired his general license to wait on theBlefuscudian monarch which he was pleased to grant me as I couldperceive in a very cold manner but could not guess the reason till Ihad a whisper from a certain person that Flimnap and Bolgolam hadrepresented my intercourse with those ambassadors as a mark ofdisaffection from which I am sure my heart was wholly free. And thiswas the first time I began to conceive some imperfect idea of courtsand ministers.It is to be observed that these ambassadors spoke to me by aninterpreter the languages of both empires differing as much from eachother as any two in Europe and each nation priding itself upon theantiquity beauty and energy of their own tongue with an avowedcontempt for that of their neighbour yet our emperor standing uponthe advantage he had got by the seizure of their fleet obliged them todeliver their credentials and make their speech in the Lilliputiantongue. And it must be confessed that from the great intercourse oftrade and commerce between both realms from the continual reception ofexiles which is mutual among them and from the custom in each empireto send their young nobility and richer gentry to the other in orderto polish themselves by seeing the world and understanding men andmanners there are few persons of distinction or merchants or seamenwho dwell in the maritime parts but what can hold conversation in bothtongues as I found some weeks after when I went to pay my respects tothe emperor of Blefuscu which in the midst of great misfortunesthrough the malice of my enemies proved a very happy adventure to meas I shall relate in its proper place.The reader may remember that when I signed those articles upon which Irecovered my liberty there were some which I disliked upon account oftheir being too servile neither could anything but an extremenecessity have forced me to submit. But being now a nardac of thehighest rank in that empire such offices were looked upon as below mydignity and the emperor to do him justice never once mentioned themto me. However it was not long before I had an opportunity of doinghis majesty at least as I then thought a most signal service. I wasalarmed at midnight with the cries of many hundred people at my doorby which being suddenly awaked I was in some kind of terror. I heardthe word Burglum repeated incessantly several of the emperorscourt making their way through the crowd entreated me to comeimmediately to the palace where her imperial majestys apartment wason fire by the carelessness of a maid of honour who fell asleep whileshe was reading a romance. I got up in an instant and orders beinggiven to clear the way before me and it being likewise a moonshinenight I made a shift to get to the palace without trampling on any ofthe people. I found they had already applied ladders to the walls ofthe apartment and were well provided with buckets but the water wasat some distance. These buckets were about the size of large thimblesand the poor people supplied me with them as fast as they could butthe flame was so violent that they did little good. I might easily havestifled it with my coat which I unfortunately left behind me forhaste and came away only in my leathern jerkin. The case seemed whollydesperate and deplorable and this magnificent palace would haveinfallibly been burnt down to the ground if by a presence of mindunusual to me I had not suddenly thought of an expedient. I had theevening before drunk plentifully of a most delicious wine calledglimigrim the Blefuscudians call it flunec but ours is esteemedthe better sort which is very diuretic. By the luckiest chance in theworld I had not discharged myself of any part of it. The heat I hadcontracted by coming very near the flames and by labouring to quenchthem made the wine begin to operate by urine which I voided in such aquantity and applied so well to the proper places that in threeminutes the fire was wholly extinguished and the rest of that noblepile which had cost so many ages in erecting preserved fromdestruction.It was now daylight and I returned to my house without waiting tocongratulate with the emperor because although I had done a veryeminent piece of service yet I could not tell how his majesty mightresent the manner by which I had performed it for by the fundamentallaws of the realm it is capital in any person of what quality soeverto make water within the precincts of the palace. But I was a littlecomforted by a message from his majesty that he would give orders tothe grand justiciary for passing my pardon in form which however Icould not obtain and I was privately assured that the empressconceiving the greatest abhorrence of what I had done removed to themost distant side of the court firmly resolved that those buildingsshould never be repaired for her use and in the presence of her chiefconfidents could not forbear vowing revenge.CHAPTER VI.Of the inhabitants of Lilliput their learning laws and customs themanner of educating their children. The authors way of living in thatcountry. His vindication of a great lady.Although I intend to leave the description of this empire to aparticular treatise yet in the mean time I am content to gratify thecurious reader with some general ideas. As the common size of thenatives is somewhat under six inches high so there is an exactproportion in all other animals as well as plants and trees forinstance the tallest horses and oxen are between four and five inchesin height the sheep an inch and half more or less their geese aboutthe bigness of a sparrow and so the several gradations downwards tillyou come to the smallest which to my sight were almost invisible butnature has adapted the eyes of the Lilliputians to all objects properfor their view they see with great exactness but at no greatdistance. And to show the sharpness of their sight towards objectsthat are near I have been much pleased with observing a cook pulling alark which was not so large as a common fly and a young girlthreading an invisible needle with invisible silk. Their tallest treesare about seven feet high I mean some of those in the great royalpark the tops whereof I could but just reach with my fist clenched.The other vegetables are in the same proportion but this I leave tothe readers imagination.I shall say but little at present of their learning which for manyages has flourished in all its branches among them but their mannerof writing is very peculiar being neither from the left to the rightlike the Europeans nor from the right to the left like the Arabiansnor from up to down like the Chinese but aslant from one corner ofthe paper to the other like ladies in England.They bury their dead with their heads directly downward because theyhold an opinion that in eleven thousand moons they are all to riseagain in which period the earth which they conceive to be flat willturn upside down and by this means they shall at their resurrectionbe found ready standing on their feet. The learned among them confessthe absurdity of this doctrine but the practice still continues incompliance to the vulgar.There are some laws and customs in this empire very peculiar and ifthey were not so directly contrary to those of my own dear country Ishould be tempted to say a little in their justification. It is only tobe wished they were as well executed. The first I shall mentionrelates to informers. All crimes against the state are punished herewith the utmost severity but if the person accused makes hisinnocence plainly to appear upon his trial the accuser is immediatelyput to an ignominious death and out of his goods or lands the innocentperson is quadruply recompensed for the loss of his time for thedanger he underwent for the hardship of his imprisonment and for allthe charges he has been at in making his defence or if that fund bedeficient it is largely supplied by the crown. The emperor alsoconfers on him some public mark of his favour and proclamation is madeof his innocence through the whole city.They look upon fraud as a greater crime than theft and thereforeseldom fail to punish it with death for they allege that care andvigilance with a very common understanding may preserve a mans goodsfrom thieves but honesty has no defence against superior cunning andsince it is necessary that there should be a perpetual intercourse ofbuying and selling and dealing upon credit where fraud is permittedand connived at or has no law to punish it the honest dealer isalways undone and the knave gets the advantage. I remember when I wasonce interceding with the emperor for a criminal who had wronged hismaster of a great sum of money which he had received by order and ranaway with and happening to tell his majesty by way of extenuationthat it was only a breach of trust the emperor thought it monstrous inme to offer as a defence the greatest aggravation of the crime andtruly I had little to say in return farther than the common answerthat different nations had different customs for I confess I washeartily ashamed. Although we usually call reward and punishment the two hinges uponwhich all government turns yet I could never observe this maxim to beput in practice by any nation except that of Lilliput. Whoever canthere bring sufficient proof that he has strictly observed the laws ofhis country for seventythree moons has a claim to certain privilegesaccording to his quality or condition of life with a proportionablesum of money out of a fund appropriated for that use he likewiseacquires the title of snilpall or legal which is added to his namebut does not descend to his posterity. And these people thought it aprodigious defect of policy among us when I told them that our lawswere enforced only by penalties without any mention of reward. It isupon this account that the image of Justice in their courts ofjudicature is formed with six eyes two before as many behind and oneach side one to signify circumspection with a bag of gold open inher right hand and a sword sheathed in her left to show she is moredisposed to reward than to punish.In choosing persons for all employments they have more regard to goodmorals than to great abilities for since government is necessary tomankind they believe that the common size of human understanding isfitted to some station or other and that Providence never intended tomake the management of public affairs a mystery to be comprehended onlyby a few persons of sublime genius of which there seldom are threeborn in an age but they suppose truth justice temperance and thelike to be in every mans power the practice of which virtuesassisted by experience and a good intention would qualify any man forthe service of his country except where a course of study is required.But they thought the want of moral virtues was so far from beingsupplied by superior endowments of the mind that employments couldnever be put into such dangerous hands as those of persons soqualified and at least that the mistakes committed by ignorance ina virtuous disposition would never be of such fatal consequence to thepublic weal as the practices of a man whose inclinations led him tobe corrupt and who had great abilities to manage to multiply anddefend his corruptions.In like manner the disbelief of a Divine Providence renders a manincapable of holding any public station for since kings avowthemselves to be the deputies of Providence the Lilliputians thinknothing can be more absurd than for a prince to employ such men asdisown the authority under which he acts.In relating these and the following laws I would only be understood tomean the original institutions and not the most scandalouscorruptions into which these people are fallen by the degeneratenature of man. For as to that infamous practice of acquiring greatemployments by dancing on the ropes or badges of favour anddistinction by leaping over sticks and creeping under them the readeris to observe that they were first introduced by the grandfather ofthe emperor now reigning and grew to the present height by the gradualincrease of party and faction.Ingratitude is among them a capital crime as we read it to have beenin some other countries for they reason thus that whoever makes illreturns to his benefactor must needs be a common enemy to the rest ofmankind from whom he has received no obligation and therefore such aman is not fit to live.Their notions relating to the duties of parents and children differextremely from ours. For since the conjunction of male and female isfounded upon the great law of nature in order to propagate andcontinue the species the Lilliputians will needs have it that men andwomen are joined together like other animals by the motives ofconcupiscence and that their tenderness towards their young proceedsfrom the like natural principle for which reason they will never allowthat a child is under any obligation to his father for begetting himor to his mother for bringing him into the world which consideringthe miseries of human life was neither a benefit in itself norintended so by his parents whose thoughts in their love encounterswere otherwise employed. Upon these and the like reasonings theiropinion is that parents are the last of all others to be trusted withthe education of their own children and therefore they have in everytown public nurseries where all parents except cottagers andlabourers are obliged to send their infants of both sexes to be rearedand educated when they come to the age of twenty moons at which timethey are supposed to have some rudiments of docility. These schools areof several kinds suited to different qualities and both sexes. Theyhave certain professors well skilled in preparing children for such acondition of life as befits the rank of their parents and their owncapacities as well as inclinations. I shall first say something of themale nurseries and then of the female.The nurseries for males of noble or eminent birth are provided withgrave and learned professors and their several deputies. The clothesand food of the children are plain and simple. They are bred up in theprinciples of honour justice courage modesty clemency religionand love of their country they are always employed in some businessexcept in the times of eating and sleeping which are very short andtwo hours for diversions consisting of bodily exercises. They aredressed by men till four years of age and then are obliged to dressthemselves although their quality be ever so great and the womenattendant who are aged proportionably to ours at fifty perform onlythe most menial offices. They are never suffered to converse withservants but go together in smaller or greater numbers to take theirdiversions and always in the presence of a professor or one of hisdeputies whereby they avoid those early bad impressions of folly andvice to which our children are subject. Their parents are suffered tosee them only twice a year the visit is to last but an hour they areallowed to kiss the child at meeting and parting but a professor whoalways stands by on those occasions will not suffer them to whisperor use any fondling expressions or bring any presents of toyssweetmeats and the like.The pension from each family for the education and entertainment of achild upon failure of due payment is levied by the emperorsofficers.The nurseries for children of ordinary gentlemen merchants tradersand handicrafts are managed proportionably after the same manner onlythose designed for trades are put out apprentices at eleven years oldwhereas those of persons of quality continue in their exercises tillfifteen which answers to twentyone with us but the confinement isgradually lessened for the last three years.In the female nurseries the young girls of quality are educated muchlike the males only they are dressed by orderly servants of their ownsex but always in the presence of a professor or deputy till theycome to dress themselves which is at five years old. And if it befound that these nurses ever presume to entertain the girls withfrightful or foolish stories or the common follies practised bychambermaids among us they are publicly whipped thrice about the cityimprisoned for a year and banished for life to the most desolate partof the country. Thus the young ladies are as much ashamed of beingcowards and fools as the men and despise all personal ornamentsbeyond decency and cleanliness neither did I perceive any differencein their education made by their difference of sex only that theexercises of the females were not altogether so robust and that somerules were given them relating to domestic life and a smaller compassof learning was enjoined them for their maxim is that among peoplesof quality a wife should be always a reasonable and agreeablecompanion because she cannot always be young. When the girls aretwelve years old which among them is the marriageable age theirparents or guardians take them home with great expressions ofgratitude to the professors and seldom without tears of the young ladyand her companions.In the nurseries of females of the meaner sort the children areinstructed in all kinds of works proper for their sex and theirseveral degrees those intended for apprentices are dismissed at sevenyears old the rest are kept to eleven.The meaner families who have children at these nurseries are obligedbesides their annual pension which is as low as possible to return tothe steward of the nursery a small monthly share of their gettings tobe a portion for the child and therefore all parents are limited intheir expenses by the law. For the Lilliputians think nothing can bemore unjust than for people in subservience to their own appetitesto bring children into the world and leave the burthen of supportingthem on the public. As to persons of quality they give security toappropriate a certain sum for each child suitable to their conditionand these funds are always managed with good husbandry and the mostexact justice.The cottagers and labourers keep their children at home their businessbeing only to till and cultivate the earth and therefore theireducation is of little consequence to the public but the old anddiseased among them are supported by hospitals for begging is a tradeunknown in this empire.And here it may perhaps divert the curious reader to give someaccount of my domestics and my manner of living in this countryduring a residence of nine months and thirteen days. Having a headmechanically turned and being likewise forced by necessity I had madefor myself a table and chair convenient enough out of the largesttrees in the royal park. Two hundred sempstresses were employed to makeme shirts and linen for my bed and table all of the strongest andcoarsest kind they could get which however they were forced to quilttogether in several folds for the thickest was some degrees finer thanlawn. Their linen is usually three inches wide and three feet make apiece. The sempstresses took my measure as I lay on the ground onestanding at my neck and another at my midleg with a strong cordextended that each held by the end while a third measured the lengthof the cord with a rule of an inch long. Then they measured my rightthumb and desired no more for by a mathematical computation thattwice round the thumb is once round the wrist and so on to the neckand the waist and by the help of my old shirt which I displayed onthe ground before them for a pattern they fitted me exactly. Threehundred tailors were employed in the same manner to make me clothesbut they had another contrivance for taking my measure. I kneeled downand they raised a ladder from the ground to my neck upon this ladderone of them mounted and let fall a plumbline from my collar to thefloor which just answered the length of my coat but my waist and armsI measured myself. When my clothes were finished which was done in myhouse for the largest of theirs would not have been able to holdthem they looked like the patchwork made by the ladies in Englandonly that mine were all of a colour.I had three hundred cooks to dress my victuals in little convenienthuts built about my house where they and their families lived andprepared me two dishes apiece. I took up twenty waiters in my handand placed them on the table a hundred more attended below on theground some with dishes of meat and some with barrels of wine andother liquors slung on their shoulders all which the waiters abovedrew up as I wanted in a very ingenious manner by certain cords aswe draw the bucket up a well in Europe. A dish of their meat was a goodmouthful and a barrel of their liquor a reasonable draught. Theirmutton yields to ours but their beef is excellent. I have had asirloin so large that I have been forced to make three bites of itbut this is rare. My servants were astonished to see me eat it bonesand all as in our country we do the leg of a lark. Their geese andturkeys I usually ate at a mouthful and I confess they far exceedours. Of their smaller fowl I could take up twenty or thirty at the endof my knife.One day his imperial majesty being informed of my way of livingdesired that himself and his royal consort with the young princes ofthe blood of both sexes might have the happiness as he was pleasedto call it of dining with me. They came accordingly and I placedthem in chairs of state upon my table just over against me withtheir guards about them. Flimnap the lord high treasurer attendedthere likewise with his white staff and I observed he often looked onme with a sour countenance which I would not seem to regard but atemore than usual in honour to my dear country as well as to fill thecourt with admiration. I have some private reasons to believe thatthis visit from his majesty gave Flimnap an opportunity of doing me illoffices to his master. That minister had always been my secret enemythough he outwardly caressed me more than was usual to the morosenessof his nature. He represented to the emperor the low condition of histreasury that he was forced to take up money at a great discount thatexchequer bills would not circulate under nine per cent. below parthat I had cost his majesty above a million and a half of sprugstheir greatest gold coin about the bigness of a spangle and uponthe whole that it would be advisable in the emperor to take the firstfair occasion of dismissing me.I am here obliged to vindicate the reputation of an excellent lady whowas an innocent sufferer upon my account. The treasurer took a fancy tobe jealous of his wife from the malice of some evil tongues whoinformed him that her grace had taken a violent affection for myperson and the court scandal ran for some time that she once cameprivately to my lodging. This I solemnly declare to be a most infamousfalsehood without any grounds further than that her grace was pleasedto treat me with all innocent marks of freedom and friendship. I ownshe came often to my house but always publicly nor ever without threemore in the coach who were usually her sister and young daughter andsome particular acquaintance but this was common to many other ladiesof the court. And I still appeal to my servants round whether they atany time saw a coach at my door without knowing what persons were init. On those occasions when a servant had given me notice my customwas to go immediately to the door and after paying my respects totake up the coach and two horses very carefully in my hands for ifthere were six horses the postillion always unharnessed four andplace them on a table where I had fixed a movable rim quite round offive inches high to prevent accidents. And I have often had fourcoaches and horses at once on my table full of company while I sat inmy chair leaning my face towards them and when I was engaged with oneset the coachmen would gently drive the others round my table. I havepassed many an afternoon very agreeably in these conversations. But Idefy the treasurer or his two informers I will name them and letthem make the best of it Clustril and Drunlo to prove that any personever came to me incognito except the secretary Reldresal who wassent by express command of his imperial majesty as I have beforerelated. I should not have dwelt so long upon this particular if ithad not been a point wherein the reputation of a great lady is sonearly concerned to say nothing of my own though I then had thehonour to be a nardac which the treasurer himself is not for allthe world knows that he is only a glumglum a title inferior by onedegree as that of a marquis is to a duke in England yet I allow hepreceded me in right of his post. These false informations which Iafterwards came to the knowledge of by an accident not proper tomention made the treasurer show his lady for some time an illcountenance and me a worse and although he was at last undeceived andreconciled to her yet I lost all credit with him and found myinterest decline very fast with the emperor himself who was indeedtoo much governed by that favourite.CHAPTER VII.The author being informed of a design to accuse him of hightreasonmakes his escape to Blefuscu. His reception there.Before I proceed to give an account of my leaving this kingdom it maybe proper to inform the reader of a private intrigue which had been fortwo months forming against me.I had been hitherto all my life a stranger to courts for which I wasunqualified by the meanness of my condition. I had indeed heard andread enough of the dispositions of great princes and ministers butnever expected to have found such terrible effects of them in soremote a country governed as I thought by very different maxims fromthose in Europe.When I was just preparing to pay my attendance on the emperor ofBlefuscu a considerable person at court to whom I had been veryserviceable at a time when he lay under the highest displeasure of hisimperial majesty came to my house very privately at night in a closechair and without sending his name desired admittance. The chairmenwere dismissed I put the chair with his lordship in it into mycoatpocket and giving orders to a trusty servant to say I wasindisposed and gone to sleep I fastened the door of my house placedthe chair on the table according to my usual custom and sat down byit. After the common salutations were over observing his lordshipscountenance full of concern and inquiring into the reason he desiredI would hear him with patience in a matter that highly concerned myhonour and my life. His speech was to the following effect for I tooknotes of it as soon as he left meYou are to know said he that several committees of council havebeen lately called in the most private manner on your account and itis but two days since his majesty came to a full resolution.You are very sensible that Skyresh Bolgolam galbet orhighadmiral has been your mortal enemy almost ever since yourarrival. His original reasons I know not but his hatred is increasedsince your great success against Blefuscu by which his glory asadmiral is much obscured. This lord in conjunction with Flimnap thehightreasurer whose enmity against you is notorious on account of hislady Limtoc the general Lalcon the chamberlain and Balmuff the grandjusticiary have prepared articles of impeachment against you fortreason and other capital crimes.This preface made me so impatient being conscious of my own merits andinnocence that I was going to interrupt him when he entreated me tobe silent and thus proceededOut of gratitude for the favours you have done me I procuredinformation of the whole proceedings and a copy of the articleswherein I venture my head for your service.Articles of Impeachment against QUINBUS FLESTRIN theManMountain.Article I.Whereas by a statute made in the reign of his imperial majesty CalinDeffar Plune it is enacted that whoever shall make water within theprecincts of the royal palace shall be liable to the pains andpenalties of hightreason notwithstanding the said Quinbus Flestrinin open breach of the said law under colour of extinguishing the firekindled in the apartment of his majestys most dear imperial consortdid maliciously traitorously and devilishly by discharge of hisurine put out the said fire kindled in the said apartment lying andbeing within the precincts of the said royal palace against thestatute in that case provided etc. against the duty etc.Article II.That the said Quinbus Flestrin having brought the imperial fleet ofBlefuscu into the royal port and being afterwards commanded by hisimperial majesty to seize all the other ships of the said empire ofBlefuscu and reduce that empire to a province to be governed by aviceroy from hence and to destroy and put to death not only all theBigendian exiles but likewise all the people of that empire who wouldnot immediately forsake the Bigendian heresy he the said Flestrinlike a false traitor against his most auspicious serene imperialmajesty did petition to be excused from the said service uponpretence of unwillingness to force the consciences or destroy theliberties and lives of an innocent people.Article III.That whereas certain ambassadors arrived from the Court of Blefuscuto sue for peace in his majestys court he the said Flestrin didlike a false traitor aid abet comfort and divert the saidambassadors although he knew them to be servants to a prince who waslately an open enemy to his imperial majesty and in an open waragainst his said majesty.Article IV.That the said Quinbus Flestrin contrary to the duty of a faithfulsubject is now preparing to make a voyage to the court and empire ofBlefuscu for which he has received only verbal license from hisimperial majesty and under colour of the said license does falselyand traitorously intend to take the said voyage and thereby to aidcomfort and abet the emperor of Blefuscu so lately an enemy and inopen war with his imperial majesty aforesaid.There are some other articles but these are the most important ofwhich I have read you an abstract.In the several debates upon this impeachment it must be confessedthat his majesty gave many marks of his great lenity often urging theservices you had done him and endeavouring to extenuate your crimes.The treasurer and admiral insisted that you should be put to the mostpainful and ignominious death by setting fire to your house at nightand the general was to attend with twenty thousand men armed withpoisoned arrows to shoot you on the face and hands. Some of yourservants were to have private orders to strew a poisonous juice on yourshirts and sheets which would soon make you tear your own flesh anddie in the utmost torture. The general came into the same opinion sothat for a long time there was a majority against you but his majestyresolving if possible to spare your life at last brought off thechamberlain.Upon this incident Reldresal principal secretary for privateaffairs who always approved himself your true friend was commanded bythe emperor to deliver his opinion which he accordingly did andtherein justified the good thoughts you have of him. He allowed yourcrimes to be great but that still there was room for mercy the mostcommendable virtue in a prince and for which his majesty was so justlycelebrated. He said the friendship between you and him was so wellknown to the world that perhaps the most honourable board might thinkhim partial however in obedience to the command he had received hewould freely offer his sentiments. That if his majesty inconsideration of your services and pursuant to his own mercifuldisposition would please to spare your life and only give orders toput out both your eyes he humbly conceived that by this expedientjustice might in some measure be satisfied and all the world wouldapplaud the lenity of the emperor as well as the fair and generousproceedings of those who have the honour to be his counsellors. Thatthe loss of your eyes would be no impediment to your bodily strengthby which you might still be useful to his majesty that blindness is anaddition to courage by concealing dangers from us that the fear youhad for your eyes was the greatest difficulty in bringing over theenemys fleet and it would be sufficient for you to see by the eyes ofthe ministers since the greatest princes do no more.This proposal was received with the utmost disapprobation by the wholeboard. Bolgolam the admiral could not preserve his temper butrising up in fury said he wondered how the secretary durst presume togive his opinion for preserving the life of a traitor that theservices you had performed were by all true reasons of state thegreat aggravation of your crimes that you who were able to extinguishthe fire by discharge of urine in her majestys apartment which hementioned with horror might at another time raise an inundation bythe same means to drown the whole palace and the same strength whichenabled you to bring over the enemys fleet might serve upon thefirst discontent to carry it back that he had good reasons to thinkyou were a Bigendian in your heart and as treason begins in theheart before it appears in overt acts so he accused you as a traitoron that account and therefore insisted you should be put to death.The treasurer was of the same opinion he showed to what straits hismajestys revenue was reduced by the charge of maintaining you whichwould soon grow insupportable that the secretarys expedient ofputting out your eyes was so far from being a remedy against thisevil that it would probably increase it as is manifest from thecommon practice of blinding some kind of fowls after which they fedthe faster and grew sooner fat that his sacred majesty and thecouncil who are your judges were in their own consciences fullyconvinced of your guilt which was a sufficient argument to condemn youto death without the formal proofs required by the strict letter ofthe law.But his imperial majesty fully determined against capital punishmentwas graciously pleased to say that since the council thought the lossof your eyes too easy a censure some other way may be inflictedhereafter. And your friend the secretary humbly desiring to be heardagain in answer to what the treasurer had objected concerning thegreat charge his majesty was at in maintaining you said that hisexcellency who had the sole disposal of the emperors revenue mighteasily provide against that evil by gradually lessening yourestablishment by which for want of sufficient food you would growweak and faint and lose your appetite and consequently decay andconsume in a few months neither would the stench of your carcass bethen so dangerous when it should become more than half diminished andimmediately upon your death five or six thousand of his majestyssubjects might in two or three days cut your flesh from your bonestake it away by cartloads and bury it in distant parts to preventinfection leaving the skeleton as a monument of admiration toposterity.Thus by the great friendship of the secretary the whole affair wascompromised. It was strictly enjoined that the project of starving youby degrees should be kept a secret but the sentence of putting outyour eyes was entered on the books none dissenting except Bolgolamthe admiral who being a creature of the empress was perpetuallyinstigated by her majesty to insist upon your death she having borneperpetual malice against you on account of that infamous and illegalmethod you took to extinguish the fire in her apartment.In three days your friend the secretary will be directed to come toyour house and read before you the articles of impeachment and thento signify the great lenity and favour of his majesty and councilwhereby you are only condemned to the loss of your eyes which hismajesty does not question you will gratefully and humbly submit to andtwenty of his majestys surgeons will attend in order to see theoperation well performed by discharging very sharppointed arrows intothe balls of your eyes as you lie on the ground.I leave to your prudence what measures you will take and to avoidsuspicion I must immediately return in as private a manner as I came.His lordship did so and I remained alone under many doubts andperplexities of mind.It was a custom introduced by this prince and his ministry verydifferent as I have been assured from the practice of former timesthat after the court had decreed any cruel execution either to gratifythe monarchs resentment or the malice of a favourite the emperoralways made a speech to his whole council expressing his great lenityand tenderness as qualities known and confessed by all the world. Thisspeech was immediately published throughout the kingdom nor did anything terrify the people so much as those encomiums on his majestysmercy because it was observed that the more these praises wereenlarged and insisted on the more inhuman was the punishment and thesufferer more innocent. Yet as to myself I must confess having neverbeen designed for a courtier either by my birth or education I was soill a judge of things that I could not discover the lenity and favourof this sentence but conceived it perhaps erroneously rather to berigorous than gentle. I sometimes thought of standing my trial foralthough I could not deny the facts alleged in the several articlesyet I hoped they would admit of some extenuation. But having in my lifeperused many statetrials which I ever observed to terminate as thejudges thought fit to direct I durst not rely on so dangerous adecision in so critical a juncture and against such powerful enemies.Once I was strongly bent upon resistance for while I had liberty thewhole strength of that empire could hardly subdue me and I mighteasily with stones pelt the metropolis to pieces but I soon rejectedthat project with horror by remembering the oath I had made to theemperor the favours I received from him and the high title ofnardac he conferred upon me. Neither had I so soon learned thegratitude of courtiers to persuade myself that his majestys presentseverities acquitted me of all past obligations.At last I fixed upon a resolution for which it is probable I mayincur some censure and not unjustly for I confess I owe thepreserving of my eyes and consequently my liberty to my own greatrashness and want of experience because if I had then known thenature of princes and ministers which I have since observed in manyother courts and their methods of treating criminals less obnoxiousthan myself I should with great alacrity and readiness havesubmitted to so easy a punishment. But hurried on by the precipitancyof youth and having his imperial majestys license to pay myattendance upon the emperor of Blefuscu I took this opportunitybefore the three days were elapsed to send a letter to my friend thesecretary signifying my resolution of setting out that morning forBlefuscu pursuant to the leave I had got and without waiting for ananswer I went to that side of the island where our fleet lay. I seizeda large man of war tied a cable to the prow and lifting up theanchors I stripped myself put my clothes together with my coverletwhich I carried under my arm into the vessel and drawing it afterme between wading and swimming arrived at the royal port of Blefuscuwhere the people had long expected me they lent me two guides todirect me to the capital city which is of the same name. I held themin my hands till I came within two hundred yards of the gate anddesired them to signify my arrival to one of the secretaries and lethim know I there waited his majestys command. I had an answer inabout an hour that his majesty attended by the royal family andgreat officers of the court was coming out to receive me. I advanceda hundred yards. The emperor and his train alighted from their horsesthe empress and ladies from their coaches and I did not perceive theywere in any fright or concern. I lay on the ground to kiss hismajestys and the empresss hands. I told his majesty that I was comeaccording to my promise and with the license of the emperor my masterto have the honour of seeing so mighty a monarch and to offer him anyservice in my power consistent with my duty to my own prince notmentioning a word of my disgrace because I had hitherto no regularinformation of it and might suppose myself wholly ignorant of any suchdesign neither could I reasonably conceive that the emperor woulddiscover the secret while I was out of his power wherein however itsoon appeared I was deceived.I shall not trouble the reader with the particular account of myreception at this court which was suitable to the generosity of sogreat a prince nor of the difficulties I was in for want of a houseand bed being forced to lie on the ground wrapped up in my coverlet.CHAPTER VIII.The author by a lucky accident finds means to leave Blefuscu andafter some difficulties returns safe to his native country.Three days after my arrival walking out of curiosity to the northeastcoast of the island I observed about half a league off in the seasomewhat that looked like a boat overturned. I pulled off my shoes andstockings and wading two or three hundred yards I found the objectto approach nearer by force of the tide and then plainly saw it to bea real boat which I supposed might by some tempest have been drivenfrom a ship. Whereupon I returned immediately towards the city anddesired his imperial majesty to lend me twenty of the tallest vesselshe had left after the loss of his fleet and three thousand seamenunder the command of his viceadmiral. This fleet sailed round while Iwent back the shortest way to the coast where I first discovered theboat. I found the tide had driven it still nearer. The seamen were allprovided with cordage which I had beforehand twisted to a sufficientstrength. When the ships came up I stripped myself and waded till Icame within a hundred yards of the boat after which I was forced toswim till I got up to it. The seamen threw me the end of the cordwhich I fastened to a hole in the forepart of the boat and the otherend to a man of war but I found all my labour to little purpose forbeing out of my depth I was not able to work. In this necessity I wasforced to swim behind and push the boat forward as often as I couldwith one of my hands and the tide favouring me I advanced so far thatI could just hold up my chin and feel the ground. I rested two or threeminutes and then gave the boat another shove and so on till the seawas no higher than my armpits and now the most laborious part beingover I took out my other cables which were stowed in one of theships and fastened them first to the boat and then to nine of thevessels which attended me the wind being favourable the seamen towedand I shoved until we arrived within forty yards of the shore andwaiting till the tide was out I got dry to the boat and by theassistance of two thousand men with ropes and engines I made a shiftto turn it on its bottom and found it was but little damaged.I shall not trouble the reader with the difficulties I was under bythe help of certain paddles which cost me ten days making to get myboat to the royal port of Blefuscu where a mighty concourse of peopleappeared upon my arrival full of wonder at the sight of so prodigiousa vessel. I told the emperor that my good fortune had thrown this boatin my way to carry me to some place whence I might return into mynative country and begged his majestys orders for getting materialsto fit it up together with his license to depart which after somekind expostulations he was pleased to grant.I did very much wonder in all this time not to have heard of anyexpress relating to me from our emperor to the court of Blefuscu. But Iwas afterward given privately to understand that his imperial majestynever imagining I had the least notice of his designs believed I wasonly gone to Blefuscu in performance of my promise according to thelicense he had given me which was well known at our court and wouldreturn in a few days when the ceremony was ended. But he was at lastin pain at my long absence and after consulting with the treasurer andthe rest of that cabal a person of quality was dispatched with thecopy of the articles against me. This envoy had instructions torepresent to the monarch of Blefuscu the great lenity of his masterwho was content to punish me no farther than with the loss of my eyesthat I had fled from justice and if I did not return in two hours Ishould be deprived of my title of nardac and declared a traitor.The envoy further added that in order to maintain the peace and amitybetween both empires his master expected that his brother of Blefuscuwould give orders to have me sent back to Lilliput bound hand andfoot to be punished as a traitor.The emperor of Blefuscu having taken three days to consult returnedan answer consisting of many civilities and excuses. He said that asfor sending me bound his brother knew it was impossible thatalthough I had deprived him of his fleet yet he owed great obligationsto me for many good offices I had done him in making the peace. Thathowever both their majesties would soon be made easy for I had founda prodigious vessel on the shore able to carry me on the sea which hehad given orders to fit up with my own assistance and direction andhe hoped in a few weeks both empires would be freed from soinsupportable an encumbrance.With this answer the envoy returned to Lilliput and the monarch ofBlefuscu related to me all that had passed offering me at the sametime but under the strictest confidence his gracious protection if Iwould continue in his service wherein although I believed himsincere yet I resolved never more to put any confidence in princes orministers where I could possibly avoid it and therefore with all dueacknowledgments for his favourable intentions I humbly begged to beexcused. I told him that since fortune whether good or evil hadthrown a vessel in my way I was resolved to venture myself on theocean rather than be an occasion of difference between two such mightymonarchs. Neither did I find the emperor at all displeased and Idiscovered by a certain accident that he was very glad of myresolution and so were most of his ministers.These considerations moved me to hasten my departure somewhat soonerthan I intended to which the court impatient to have me gone veryreadily contributed. Five hundred workmen were employed to make twosails to my boat according to my directions by quilting thirteenfolds of their strongest linen together. I was at the pains of makingropes and cables by twisting ten twenty or thirty of the thickestand strongest of theirs. A great stone that I happened to find after along search by the seashore served me for an anchor. I had thetallow of three hundred cows for greasing my boat and other uses. Iwas at incredible pains in cutting down some of the largesttimbertrees for oars and masts wherein I was however much assistedby his majestys shipcarpenters who helped me in smoothing themafter I had done the rough work.In about a month when all was prepared I sent to receive hismajestys commands and to take my leave. The emperor and royal familycame out of the palace I lay down on my face to kiss his hand whichhe very graciously gave me so did the empress and young princes of theblood. His majesty presented me with fifty purses of two hundredsprugs apiece together with his picture at full length which I putimmediately into one of my gloves to keep it from being hurt. Theceremonies at my departure were too many to trouble the reader with atthis time.I stored the boat with the carcases of a hundred oxen and threehundred sheep with bread and drink proportionable and as much meatready dressed as four hundred cooks could provide. I took with me sixcows and two bulls alive with as many ewes and rams intending tocarry them into my own country and propagate the breed. And to feedthem on board I had a good bundle of hay and a bag of corn. I wouldgladly have taken a dozen of the natives but this was a thing theemperor would by no means permit and besides a diligent search intomy pockets his majesty engaged my honour not to carry away any of hissubjects although with their own consent and desire.Having thus prepared all things as well as I was able I set sail onthe twentyfourth day of September at six in the morning andwhen I had gone about four leagues to the northward the wind being atsoutheast at six in the evening I descried a small island about halfa league to the northwest. I advanced forward and cast anchor on theleeside of the island which seemed to be uninhabited. I then tooksome refreshment and went to my rest. I slept well and as Iconjectured at least six hours for I found the day broke in two hoursafter I awaked. It was a clear night. I ate my breakfast before the sunwas up and heaving anchor the wind being favourable I steered thesame course that I had done the day before wherein I was directed bymy pocket compass. My intention was to reach if possible one of thoseislands which I had reason to believe lay to the northeast of VanDiemens Land. I discovered nothing all that day but upon the nextabout three in the afternoon when I had by my computation madetwentyfour leagues from Blefuscu I descried a sail steering to thesoutheast my course was due east. I hailed her but could get noanswer yet I found I gained upon her for the wind slackened. I madeall the sail I could and in half an hour she spied me then hung outher ancient and discharged a gun. It is not easy to express the joy Iwas in upon the unexpected hope of once more seeing my belovedcountry and the dear pledges I left in it. The ship slackened hersails and I came up with her between five and six in the eveningSeptember th but my heart leaped within me to see her Englishcolours. I put my cows and sheep into my coatpockets and got on boardwith all my little cargo of provisions. The vessel was an Englishmerchantman returning from Japan by the North and South seas thecaptain Mr. John Biddel of Deptford a very civil man and anexcellent sailor.We were now in the latitude of degrees south there were about fiftymen in the ship and here I met an old comrade of mine one PeterWilliams who gave me a good character to the captain. This gentlemantreated me with kindness and desired I would let him know what place Icame from last and whither I was bound which I did in a few wordsbut he thought I was raving and that the dangers I underwent haddisturbed my head whereupon I took my black cattle and sheep out of mypocket which after great astonishment clearly convinced him of myveracity. I then showed him the gold given me by the emperor ofBlefuscu together with his majestys picture at full length and someother rarities of that country. I gave him two purses of two hundredssprugs each and promised when we arrived in England to make him apresent of a cow and a sheep big with young.I shall not trouble the reader with a particular account of thisvoyage which was very prosperous for the most part. We arrived in theDowns on the th of April . I had only one misfortune that therats on board carried away one of my sheep I found her bones in ahole picked clean from the flesh. The rest of my cattle I got safeashore and set them agrazing in a bowlinggreen at Greenwich wherethe fineness of the grass made them feed very heartily though I hadalways feared the contrary neither could I possibly have preservedthem in so long a voyage if the captain had not allowed me some of hisbest biscuit which rubbed to powder and mingled with water wastheir constant food. The short time I continued in England I made aconsiderable profit by showing my cattle to many persons of quality andothers and before I began my second voyage I sold them for sixhundred pounds. Since my last return I find the breed is considerablyincreased especially the sheep which I hope will prove much to theadvantage of the woollen manufacture by the fineness of the fleeces.I stayed but two months with my wife and family for my insatiabledesire of seeing foreign countries would suffer me to continue nolonger. I left fifteen hundred pounds with my wife and fixed her in agood house at Redriff. My remaining stock I carried with me part inmoney and part in goods in hopes to improve my fortunes. My eldestuncle John had left me an estate in land near Epping of about thirtypounds a year and I had a long lease of the Black Bull in Fetter Lanewhich yielded me as much more so that I was not in any danger ofleaving my family upon the parish. My son Johnny named so after hisuncle was at the grammar school and a towardly child. My daughterBetty who is now well married and has children was then at herneedlework. I took leave of my wife and boy and girl with tears onboth sides and went on board the Adventure a merchant ship of threehundred tons bound for Surat captain John Nicholas of Liverpoolcommander. But my account of this voyage must be referred to the SecondPart of my Travels.PART II. A VOYAGE TO BROBDINGNAG.CHAPTER I.A great storm described the long boat sent to fetch water the authorgoes with it to discover the country. He is left on shore is seized byone of the natives and carried to a farmers house. His receptionwith several accidents that happened there. A description of theinhabitants.Having been condemned by nature and fortune to active and restlesslife in two months after my return I again left my native countryand took shipping in the Downs on the th day of June in theAdventure Captain John Nicholas a Cornish man commander bound forSurat. We had a very prosperous gale till we arrived at the Cape ofGood Hope where we landed for fresh water but discovering a leak weunshipped our goods and wintered there for the captain falling sick ofan ague we could not leave the Cape till the end of March. We then setsail and had a good voyage till we passed the Straits of Madagascarbut having got northward of that island and to about five degreessouth latitude the winds which in those seas are observed to blow aconstant equal gale between the north and west from the beginning ofDecember to the beginning of May on the th of April began to blowwith much greater violence and more westerly than usual continuing sofor twenty days together during which time we were driven a little tothe east of the Molucca Islands and about three degrees northward ofthe line as our captain found by an observation he took the nd ofMay at which time the wind ceased and it was a perfect calm whereatI was not a little rejoiced. But he being a man well experienced inthe navigation of those seas bid us all prepare against a storm whichaccordingly happened the day following for the southern wind calledthe southern monsoon began to set in.Finding it was likely to overblow we took in our spritsail and stoodby to hand the foresail but making foul weather we looked the gunswere all fast and handed the mizen. The ship lay very broad off so wethought it better spooning before the sea than trying or hulling. Wereefed the foresail and set him and hauled aft the foresheet thehelm was hard aweather. The ship wore bravely. We belayed the foredownhaul but the sail was split and we hauled down the yard and gotthe sail into the ship and unbound all the things clear of it. It wasa very fierce storm the sea broke strange and dangerous. We hauled offupon the laniard of the whipstaff and helped the man at the helm. Wewould not get down our topmast but let all stand because she scuddedbefore the sea very well and we knew that the topmast being aloftthe ship was the wholesomer and made better way through the seaseeing we had searoom. When the storm was over we set foresail andmainsail and brought the ship to. Then we set the mizenmaintopsail and the foretopsail. Our course was eastnortheastthe wind was at southwest. We got the starboard tacks aboard we castoff our weatherbraces and lifts we set in the leebraces and hauledforward by the weatherbowlings and hauled them tight and belayedthem and hauled over the mizen tack to windward and kept her full andby as near as she would lie.During this storm which was followed by a strong wind westsouthwestwe were carried by my computation about five hundred leagues to theeast so that the oldest sailor on board could not tell in what part ofthe world we were. Our provisions held out well our ship was staunchand our crew all in good health but we lay in the utmost distress forwater. We thought it best to hold on the same course rather than turnmore northerly which might have brought us to the northwest part ofGreat Tartary and into the Frozen Sea.On the th day of June a boy on the topmast discovered land.On the th we came in full view of a great island or continent forwe knew not whether on the south side whereof was a small neck ofland jutting out into the sea and a creek too shallow to hold a shipof above one hundred tons. We cast anchor within a league of thiscreek and our captain sent a dozen of his men well armed in thelongboat with vessels for water if any could be found. I desired hisleave to go with them that I might see the country and make whatdiscoveries I could. When we came to land we saw no river or springnor any sign of inhabitants. Our men therefore wandered on the shore tofind out some fresh water near the sea and I walked alone about a mileon the other side where I observed the country all barren and rocky. Inow began to be weary and seeing nothing to entertain my curiosity Ireturned gently down towards the creek and the sea being full in myview I saw our men already got into the boat and rowing for life tothe ship. I was going to holla after them although it had been tolittle purpose when I observed a huge creature walking after them inthe sea as fast as he could he waded not much deeper than his kneesand took prodigious strides but our men had the start of him half aleague and the sea thereabouts being full of sharppointed rocks themonster was not able to overtake the boat. This I was afterwards toldfor I durst not stay to see the issue of the adventure but ran as fastas I could the way I first went and then climbed up a steep hillwhich gave me some prospect of the country. I found it fullycultivated but that which first surprised me was the length of thegrass which in those grounds that seemed to be kept for hay wasabout twenty feet high.I fell into a high road for so I took it to be though it served tothe inhabitants only as a footpath through a field of barley. Here Iwalked on for some time but could see little on either side it beingnow near harvest and the corn rising at least forty feet. I was anhour walking to the end of this field which was fenced in with a hedgeof at least one hundred and twenty feet high and the trees so loftythat I could make no computation of their altitude. There was a stileto pass from this field into the next. It had four steps and a stoneto cross over when you came to the uppermost. It was impossible for meto climb this stile because every step was sixfeet high and theupper stone about twenty. I was endeavouring to find some gap in thehedge when I discovered one of the inhabitants in the next fieldadvancing towards the stile of the same size with him whom I saw inthe sea pursuing our boat. He appeared as tall as an ordinary spiresteeple and took about ten yards at every stride as near as I couldguess. I was struck with the utmost fear and astonishment and ran tohide myself in the corn whence I saw him at the top of the stilelooking back into the next field on the right hand and heard him callin a voice many degrees louder than a speakingtrumpet but the noisewas so high in the air that at first I certainly thought it wasthunder. Whereupon seven monsters like himself came towards him withreapinghooks in their hands each hook about the largeness of sixscythes. These people were not so well clad as the first whoseservants or labourers they seemed to be for upon some words he spokethey went to reap the corn in the field where I lay. I kept from themat as great a distance as I could but was forced to move with extremedifficulty for the stalks of the corn were sometimes not above a footdistant so that I could hardly squeeze my body betwixt them. HoweverI made a shift to go forward till I came to a part of the field wherethe corn had been laid by the rain and wind. Here it was impossible forme to advance a step for the stalks were so interwoven that I couldnot creep through and the beards of the fallen ears so strong andpointed that they pierced through my clothes into my flesh. At thesame time I heard the reapers not a hundred yards behind me. Beingquite dispirited with toil and wholly overcome by grief and dispair Ilay down between two ridges and heartily wished I might there end mydays. I bemoaned my desolate widow and fatherless children. I lamentedmy own folly and wilfulness in attempting a second voyage against theadvice of all my friends and relations. In this terrible agitation ofmind I could not forbear thinking of Lilliput whose inhabitantslooked upon me as the greatest prodigy that ever appeared in the worldwhere I was able to draw an imperial fleet in my hand and performthose other actions which will be recorded for ever in the chroniclesof that empire while posterity shall hardly believe them althoughattested by millions. I reflected what a mortification it must prove tome to appear as inconsiderable in this nation as one singleLilliputian would be among us. But this I conceived was to be the leastof my misfortunes for as human creatures are observed to be moresavage and cruel in proportion to their bulk what could I expect butto be a morsel in the mouth of the first among these enormousbarbarians that should happen to seize me Undoubtedly philosophers arein the right when they tell us that nothing is great or littleotherwise than by comparison. It might have pleased fortune to havelet the Lilliputians find some nation where the people were asdiminutive with respect to them as they were to me. And who knows butthat even this prodigious race of mortals might be equally overmatchedin some distant part of the world whereof we have yet no discovery.Scared and confounded as I was I could not forbear going on with thesereflections when one of the reapers approaching within ten yards ofthe ridge where I lay made me apprehend that with the next step Ishould be squashed to death under his foot or cut in two with hisreapinghook. And therefore when he was again about to move Iscreamed as loud as fear could make me whereupon the huge creaturetrod short and looking round about under him for some time at lastespied me as I lay on the ground. He considered awhile with thecaution of one who endeavours to lay hold on a small dangerous animalin such a manner that it shall not be able either to scratch or bitehim as I myself have sometimes done with a weasel in England. Atlength he ventured to take me behind by the middle between hisforefinger and thumb and brought me within three yards of his eyesthat he might behold my shape more perfectly. I guessed his meaningand my good fortune gave me so much presence of mind that I resolvednot to struggle in the least as he held me in the air above sixty feetfrom the ground although he grievously pinched my sides for fear Ishould slip through his fingers. All I ventured was to raise my eyestowards the sun and place my hands together in a supplicating postureand to speak some words in a humble melancholy tone suitable to thecondition I then was in for I apprehended every moment that he woulddash me against the ground as we usually do any little hateful animalwhich we have a mind to destroy. But my good star would have it thathe appeared pleased with my voice and gestures and began to look uponme as a curiosity much wondering to hear me pronounce articulatewords although he could not understand them. In the mean time I wasnot able to forbear groaning and shedding tears and turning my headtowards my sides letting him know as well as I could how cruelly Iwas hurt by the pressure of his thumb and finger. He seemed toapprehend my meaning for lifting up the lappet of his coat he put megently into it and immediately ran along with me to his master whowas a substantial farmer and the same person I had first seen in thefield.The farmer having as I suppose by their talk received such an accountof me as his servant could give him took a piece of a small strawabout the size of a walkingstaff and therewith lifted up the lappetsof my coat which it seems he thought to be some kind of covering thatnature had given me. He blew my hairs aside to take a better view of myface. He called his hinds about him and asked them as I afterwardslearned whether they had ever seen in the fields any little creaturethat resembled me. He then placed me softly on the ground upon allfours but I got immediately up and walked slowly backward andforward to let those people see I had no intent to run away. They allsat down in a circle about me the better to observe my motions. Ipulled off my hat and made a low bow towards the farmer. I fell on myknees and lifted up my hands and eyes and spoke several words as loudas I could I took a purse of gold out of my pocket and humblypresented it to him. He received it on the palm of his hand thenapplied it close to his eye to see what it was and afterwards turnedit several times with the point of a pin which he took out of hissleeve but could make nothing of it. Whereupon I made a sign that heshould place his hand on the ground. I then took the purse andopening it poured all the gold into his palm. There were six Spanishpieces of four pistoles each beside twenty or thirty smaller coins. Isaw him wet the tip of his little finger upon his tongue and take upone of my largest pieces and then another but he seemed to be whollyignorant what they were. He made me a sign to put them again into mypurse and the purse again into my pocket which after offering it tohim several times I thought it best to do.The farmer by this time was convinced I must be a rational creature.He spoke often to me but the sound of his voice pierced my ears likethat of a watermill yet his words were articulate enough. I answeredas loud as I could in several languages and he often laid his earwithin two yards of me but all in vain for we were whollyunintelligible to each other. He then sent his servants to their workand taking his handkerchief out of his pocket he doubled and spread iton his left hand which he placed flat on the ground with the palmupward making me a sign to step into it as I could easily do for itwas not above a foot in thickness. I thought it my part to obey andfor fear of falling laid myself at full length upon the handkerchiefwith the remainder of which he lapped me up to the head for furthersecurity and in this manner carried me home to his house. There hecalled his wife and showed me to her but she screamed and ran backas women in England do at the sight of a toad or a spider. Howeverwhen she had a while seen my behaviour and how well I observed thesigns her husband made she was soon reconciled and by degrees grewextremely tender of me.It was about twelve at noon and a servant brought in dinner. It wasonly one substantial dish of meat fit for the plain condition of ahusbandman in a dish of about fourandtwenty feet diameter. Thecompany were the farmer and his wife three children and an oldgrandmother. When they were sat down the farmer placed me at somedistance from him on the table which was thirty feet high from thefloor. I was in a terrible fright and kept as far as I could from theedge for fear of falling. The wife minced a bit of meat then crumbledsome bread on a trencher and placed it before me. I made her a lowbow took out my knife and fork and fell to eat which gave themexceeding delight. The mistress sent her maid for a small dram cupwhich held about two gallons and filled it with drink I took up thevessel with much difficulty in both hands and in a most respectfulmanner drank to her ladyships health expressing the words as loud asI could in English which made the company laugh so heartily that Iwas almost deafened with the noise. This liquor tasted like a smallcider and was not unpleasant. Then the master made me a sign to cometo his trencher side but as I walked on the table being in greatsurprise all the time as the indulgent reader will easily conceive andexcuse I happened to stumble against a crust and fell flat on myface but received no hurt. I got up immediately and observing thegood people to be in much concern I took my hat which I held under myarm out of good manners and waving it over my head made threehuzzas to show I had got no mischief by my fall. But advancing forwardtowards my master as I shall henceforth call him his youngest sonwho sat next to him an arch boy of about ten years old took me up bythe legs and held me so high in the air that I trembled every limbbut his father snatched me from him and at the same time gave him sucha box on the left ear as would have felled an European troop of horseto the earth ordering him to be taken from the table. But being afraidthe boy might owe me a spite and well remembering how mischievous allchildren among us naturally are to sparrows rabbits young kittensand puppy dogs I fell on my knees and pointing to the boy made mymaster to understand as well as I could that I desired his son mightbe pardoned. The father complied and the lad took his seat againwhereupon I went to him and kissed his hand which my master took andmade him stroke me gently with it.In the midst of dinner my mistresss favourite cat leaped into herlap. I heard a noise behind me like that of a dozen stockingweavers atwork and turning my head I found it proceeded from the purring ofthat animal who seemed to be three times larger than an ox as Icomputed by the view of her head and one of her paws while hermistress was feeding and stroking her. The fierceness of thiscreatures countenance altogether discomposed me though I stood at thefarther end of the table above fifty feet off and although mymistress held her fast for fear she might give a spring and seize mein her talons. But it happened there was no danger for the cat tooknot the least notice of me when my master placed me within three yardsof her. And as I have been always told and found true by experience inmy travels that flying or discovering fear before a fierce animal isa certain way to make it pursue or attack you so I resolved in thisdangerous juncture to show no manner of concern. I walked withintrepidity five or six times before the very head of the cat and camewithin half a yard of her whereupon she drew herself back as if shewere more afraid of me I had less apprehension concerning the dogswhereof three or four came into the room as it is usual in farmershouses one of which was a mastiff equal in bulk to four elephantsand another a greyhound somewhat taller than the mastiff but not solarge.When dinner was almost done the nurse came in with a child of a yearold in her arms who immediately spied me and began a squall that youmight have heard from London Bridge to Chelsea after the usual oratoryof infants to get me for a plaything. The mother out of pureindulgence took me up and put me towards the child who presentlyseized me by the middle and got my head into his mouth where I roaredso loud that the urchin was frighted and let me drop and I shouldinfallibly have broke my neck if the mother had not held her apronunder me. The nurse to quiet her babe made use of a rattle which wasa kind of hollow vessel filled with great stones and fastened by acable to the childs waist but all in vain so that she was forced toapply the last remedy by giving it suck. I must confess no object everdisgusted me so much as the sight of her monstrous breast which Icannot tell what to compare with so as to give the curious reader anidea of its bulk shape and colour. It stood prominent six feet andcould not be less than sixteen in circumference. The nipple was abouthalf the bigness of my head and the hue both of that and the dug sovaried with spots pimples and freckles that nothing could appearmore nauseous for I had a near sight of her she sitting down themore conveniently to give suck and I standing on the table. This mademe reflect upon the fair skins of our English ladies who appear sobeautiful to us only because they are of our own size and theirdefects not to be seen but through a magnifying glass where we find byexperiment that the smoothest and whitest skins look rough and coarseand illcoloured.I remember when I was at Lilliput the complexion of those diminutivepeople appeared to me the fairest in the world and talking upon thissubject with a person of learning there who was an intimate friend ofmine he said that my face appeared much fairer and smoother when helooked on me from the ground than it did upon a nearer view when Itook him up in my hand and brought him close which he confessed wasat first a very shocking sight. He said he could discover great holesin my skin that the stumps of my beard were ten times stronger thanthe bristles of a boar and my complexion made up of several coloursaltogether disagreeable although I must beg leave to say for myselfthat I am as fair as most of my sex and country and very littlesunburnt by all my travels. On the other side discoursing of theladies in that emperors court he used to tell me one had frecklesanother too wide a mouth a third too large a nose nothing of which Iwas able to distinguish. I confess this reflection was obvious enoughwhich however I could not forbear lest the reader might think thosevast creatures were actually deformed for I must do them the justiceto say they are a comely race of people and particularly the featuresof my masters countenance although he was but a farmer when I beheldhim from the height of sixty feet appeared very well proportioned.When dinner was done my master went out to his labourers and as Icould discover by his voice and gesture gave his wife strict charge totake care of me. I was very much tired and disposed to sleep which mymistress perceiving she put me on her own bed and covered me with aclean white handkerchief but larger and coarser than the mainsail of aman of war.I slept about two hours and dreamt I was at home with my wife andchildren which aggravated my sorrows when I awaked and found myselfalone in a vast room between two and three hundred feet wide andabove two hundred high lying in a bed twenty yards wide. My mistresswas gone about her household affairs and had locked me in. The bed waseight yards from the floor. Some natural necessities required me to getdown I durst not presume to call and if I had it would have been invain with such a voice as mine at so great a distance from the roomwhere I lay to the kitchen where the family kept. While I was underthese circumstances two rats crept up the curtains and ran smellingbackwards and forwards on the bed. One of them came up almost to myface whereupon I rose in a fright and drew out my hanger to defendmyself. These horrible animals had the boldness to attack me on bothsides and one of them held his forefeet at my collar but I had thegood fortune to rip up his belly before he could do me any mischief. Hefell down at my feet and the other seeing the fate of his comrademade his escape but not without one good wound on the back which Igave him as he fled and made the blood run trickling from him. Afterthis exploit I walked gently to and fro on the bed to recover mybreath and loss of spirits. These creatures were of the size of a largemastiff but infinitely more nimble and fierce so that if I had takenoff my belt before I went to sleep I must have infallibly been torn topieces and devoured. I measured the tail of the dead rat and found itto be two yards long wanting an inch but it went against my stomachto drag the carcass off the bed where it lay still bleeding Iobserved it had yet some life but with a strong slash across the neckI thoroughly despatched it.Soon after my mistress came into the room who seeing me all bloodyran and took me up in her hand. I pointed to the dead rat smiling andmaking other signs to show I was not hurt whereat she was extremelyrejoiced calling the maid to take up the dead rat with a pair oftongs and throw it out of the window. Then she set me on a tablewhere I showed her my hanger all bloody and wiping it on the lappet ofmy coat returned it to the scabbard. I was pressed to do more than onething which another could not do for me and therefore endeavoured tomake my mistress understand that I desired to be set down on thefloor which after she had done my bashfulness would not suffer me toexpress myself farther than by pointing to the door and bowingseveral times. The good woman with much difficulty at last perceivedwhat I would be at and taking me up again in her hand walked into thegarden where she set me down. I went on one side about two hundredyards and beckoning to her not to look or to follow me I hid myselfbetween two leaves of sorrel and there discharged the necessities ofnature.I hope the gentle reader will excuse me for dwelling on these and thelike particulars which however insignificant they may appear togroveling vulgar minds yet will certainly help a philosopher toenlarge his thoughts and imagination and apply them to the benefit ofpublic as well as private life which was my sole design in presentingthis and other accounts of my travels to the world wherein I have beenchiefly studious of truth without affecting any ornaments of learningor of style. But the whole scene of this voyage made so strong animpression on my mind and is so deeply fixed in my memory that incommitting it to paper I did not omit one material circumstancehowever upon a strict review I blotted out several passages of lessmoment which were in my first copy for fear of being censured astedious and trifling whereof travellers are often perhaps not withoutjustice accused.CHAPTER II.A description of the farmers daughter. The author carried to amarkettown and then to the metropolis. The particulars of hisjourney.My mistress had a daughter of nine years old a child of towardly partsfor her age very dexterous at her needle and skilful in dressing herbaby. Her mother and she contrived to fit up the babys cradle for meagainst night the cradle was put into a small drawer of a cabinet andthe drawer placed upon a hanging shelf for fear of the rats. This wasmy bed all the time I staid with those people though made moreconvenient by degrees as I began to learn their language and make mywants known. This young girl was so handy that after I had once ortwice pulled off my clothes before her she was able to dress andundress me though I never gave her that trouble when she would let medo either myself. She made me seven shirts and some other linen of asfine cloth as could be got which indeed was coarser than sackclothand these she constantly washed for me with her own hands. She waslikewise my schoolmistress to teach me the language when I pointedto any thing she told me the name of it in her own tongue so that ina few days I was able to call for whatever I had a mind to. She wasvery goodnatured and not above forty feet high being little for herage. She gave me the name of Grildrig which the family took up andafterwards the whole kingdom. The word imports what the Latins callnanunculus the Italians homunceletino and the English mannikin.To her I chiefly owe my preservation in that country we never partedwhile I was there I called her my Glumdalclitch or little nurseand should be guilty of great ingratitude if I omitted this honourablemention of her care and affection towards me which I heartily wish itlay in my power to requite as she deserves instead of being theinnocent but unhappy instrument of her disgrace as I have too muchreason to fear.It now began to be known and talked of in the neighbourhood that mymaster had found a strange animal in the field about the bigness of asplacnuck but exactly shaped in every part like a human creaturewhich it likewise imitated in all its actions seemed to speak in alittle language of its own had already learned several words oftheirs went erect upon two legs was tame and gentle would come whenit was called do whatever it was bid had the finest limbs in theworld and a complexion fairer than a noblemans daughter of threeyears old. Another farmer who lived hard by and was a particularfriend of my master came on a visit on purpose to inquire into thetruth of this story. I was immediately produced and placed upon atable where I walked as I was commanded drew my hanger put it upagain made my reverence to my masters guest asked him in his ownlanguage how he did and told him he was welcome just as my littlenurse had instructed me. This man who was old and dimsighted put onhis spectacles to behold me better at which I could not forbearlaughing very heartily for his eyes appeared like the full moonshining into a chamber at two windows. Our people who discovered thecause of my mirth bore me company in laughing at which the old fellowwas fool enough to be angry and out of countenance. He had thecharacter of a great miser and to my misfortune he well deserved itby the cursed advice he gave my master to show me as a sight upon amarketday in the next town which was half an hours riding abouttwoandtwenty miles from our house. I guessed there was some mischiefwhen I observed my master and his friend whispering together sometimespointing at me and my fears made me fancy that I overheard andunderstood some of their words. But the next morning Glumdalclitch mylittle nurse told me the whole matter which she had cunningly pickedout from her mother. The poor girl laid me on her bosom and fell aweeping with shame and grief. She apprehended some mischief wouldhappen to me from rude vulgar folks who might squeeze me to death orbreak one of my limbs by taking me in their hands. She had alsoobserved how modest I was in my nature how nicely I regarded myhonour and what an indignity I should conceive it to be exposed formoney as a public spectacle to the meanest of the people. She saidher papa and mamma had promised that Grildrig should be hers but nowshe found they meant to serve her as they did last year when theypretended to give her a lamb and yet as soon as it was fat sold itto a butcher. For my own part I may truly affirm that I was lessconcerned than my nurse. I had a strong hope which never left me thatI should one day recover my liberty and as to the ignominy of beingcarried about for a monster I considered myself to be a perfectstranger in the country and that such a misfortune could never becharged upon me as a reproach if ever I should return to Englandsince the king of Great Britain himself in my condition must haveundergone the same distress.My master pursuant to the advice of his friend carried me in a boxthe next marketday to the neighbouring town and took along with himhis little daughter my nurse upon a pillion behind him. The box wasclose on every side with a little door for me to go in and out and afew gimlet holes to let in air. The girl had been so careful as to putthe quilt of her babys bed into it for me to lie down on. However Iwas terribly shaken and discomposed in this journey though it was butof half an hour for the horse went about forty feet at every step andtrotted so high that the agitation was equal to the rising and fallingof a ship in a great storm but much more frequent. Our journey wassomewhat farther than from London to St. Albans. My master alighted atan inn which he used to frequent and after consulting a while with theinnkeeper and making some necessary preparations he hired thegrultrud or crier to give notice through the town of a strangecreature to be seen at the sign of the Green Eagle not so big as asplacnuck an animal in that country very finely shaped about sixfeet long and in every part of the body resembling a human creaturecould speak several words and perform a hundred diverting tricks.I was placed upon a table in the largest room of the inn which mightbe near three hundred feet square. My little nurse stood on a low stoolclose to the table to take care of me and direct what I should do. Mymaster to avoid a crowd would suffer only thirty people at a time tosee me. I walked about on the table as the girl commanded she asked mequestions as far as she knew my understanding of the language reachedand I answered them as loud as I could. I turned about several times tothe company paid my humble respects said they were welcome andused some other speeches I had been taught. I took up a thimble filledwith liquor which Glumdalclitch had given me for a cup and dranktheir health I drew out my hanger and flourished with it after themanner of fencers in England. My nurse gave me a part of a straw whichI exercised as a pike having learnt the art in my youth. I was thatday shown to twelve sets of company and as often forced to act overagain the same fopperies till I was half dead with weariness andvexation for those who had seen me made such wonderful reports thatthe people were ready to break down the doors to come in. My masterfor his own interest would not suffer any one to touch me except mynurse and to prevent danger benches were set round the table at sucha distance as to put me out of every bodys reach. However an unluckyschoolboy aimed a hazel nut directly at my head which very narrowlymissed me otherwise it came with so much violence that it would haveinfallibly knocked out my brains for it was almost as large as a smallpumpkin but I had the satisfaction to see the young rogue well beatenand turned out of the room.My master gave public notice that he would show me again the nextmarketday and in the meantime he prepared a convenient vehicle forme which he had reason enough to do for I was so tired with my firstjourney and with entertaining company for eight hours together that Icould hardly stand upon my legs or speak a word. It was at least threedays before I recovered my strength and that I might have no rest athome all the neighbouring gentlemen from a hundred miles roundhearing of my fame came to see me at my masters own house. Therecould not be fewer than thirty persons with their wives and childrenfor the country is very populous and my master demanded the rate ofa full room whenever he showed me at home although it were only to asingle family so that for some time I had but little ease every day ofthe week except Wednesday which is their Sabbath although I werenot carried to the town.My master finding how profitable I was likely to be resolved to carryme to the most considerable cities of the kingdom. Having thereforeprovided himself with all things necessary for a long journey andsettled his affairs at home he took leave of his wife and upon theth of August about two months after my arrival we set out forthe metropolis situated near the middle of that empire and aboutthree thousand miles distance from our house. My master made hisdaughter Glumdalclitch ride behind him. She carried me on her lap in abox tied about her waist. The girl had lined it on all sides with thesoftest cloth she could get well quilted underneath furnished it withher babys bed provided me with linen and other necessaries and madeeverything as convenient as she could. We had no other company but aboy of the house who rode after us with the luggage.My masters design was to show me in all the towns by the way and tostep out of the road for fifty or a hundred miles to any village orperson of qualitys house where he might expect custom. We made easyjourneys of not above seven or eight score miles a day forGlumdalclitch on purpose to spare me complained she was tired withthe trotting of the horse. She often took me out of my box at my owndesire to give me air and show me the country but always held mefast by a leadingstring. We passed over five or six rivers manydegrees broader and deeper than the Nile or the Ganges and there washardly a rivulet so small as the Thames at London Bridge. We were tenweeks in our journey and I was shown in eighteen large towns besidesmany villages and private families.On the th day of October we arrived at the metropolis called intheir language Lorbrulgrud or Pride of the Universe. My master tooka lodging in the principal street of the city not far from the royalpalace and put out bills in the usual form containing an exactdescription of my person and parts. He hired a large room between threeand four hundred feet wide. He provided a table sixty feet in diameterupon which I was to act my part and pallisadoed it round three feetfrom the edge and as many high to prevent my falling over. I wasshown ten times a day to the wonder and satisfaction of all people. Icould now speak the language tolerably well and perfectly understoodevery word that was spoken to me. Besides I had learnt theiralphabet and could make a shift to explain a sentence here and therefor Glumdalclitch had been my instructor while we were at home and atleisure hours during our journey. She carried a little book in herpocket not much larger than a Sansons Atlas it was a common treatisefor the use of young girls giving a short account of their religionout of this she taught me my letters and interpreted the words.CHAPTER III.The author sent for to court. The queen buys him of his master thefarmer and presents him to the king. He disputes with his majestysgreat scholars. An apartment at court provided for the author. He is inhigh favour with the queen. He stands up for the honour of his owncountry. His quarrels with the queens dwarf.The frequent labours I underwent every day made in a few weeks avery considerable change in my health the more my master got by methe more insatiable he grew. I had quite lost my stomach and wasalmost reduced to a skeleton. The farmer observed it and concluding Imust soon die resolved to make as good a hand of me as he could. Whilehe was thus reasoning and resolving with himself a sardral orgentlemanusher came from court commanding my master to carry meimmediately thither for the diversion of the queen and her ladies. Someof the latter had already been to see me and reported strange thingsof my beauty behaviour and good sense. Her majesty and those whoattended her were beyond measure delighted with my demeanour. I fellon my knees and begged the honour of kissing her imperial foot butthis gracious princess held out her little finger towards me after Iwas set on the table which I embraced in both my arms and put the tipof it with the utmost respect to my lip. She made me some generalquestions about my country and my travels which I answered asdistinctly and in as few words as I could. She asked whether I couldbe content to live at court I bowed down to the board of the tableand humbly answered that I was my masters slave but if I were at myown disposal I should be proud to devote my life to her majestysservice. She then asked my master whether he was willing to sell meat a good price He who apprehended I could not live a month wasready enough to part with me and demanded a thousand pieces of goldwhich were ordered him on the spot each piece being about the bignessof eight hundred moidores but allowing for the proportion of allthings between that country and Europe and the high price of goldamong them was hardly so great a sum as a thousand guineas would be inEngland. I then said to the queen since I was now her majestys mosthumble creature and vassal I must beg the favour that Glumdalclitchwho had always tended me with so much care and kindness and understoodto do it so well might be admitted into her service and continue tobe my nurse and instructor.Her majesty agreed to my petition and easily got the farmers consentwho was glad enough to have his daughter preferred at court and thepoor girl herself was not able to hide her joy. My late masterwithdrew bidding me farewell and saying he had left me in a goodservice to which I replied not a word only making him a slight bow.The queen observed my coldness and when the farmer was gone out ofthe apartment asked me the reason. I made bold to tell her majestythat I owed no other obligation to my late master than his notdashing out the brains of a poor harmless creature found by chance inhis fields which obligation was amply recompensed by the gain he hadmade in showing me through half the kingdom and the price he had nowsold me for. That the life I had since led was laborious enough to killan animal of ten times my strength. That my health was much impairedby the continual drudgery of entertaining the rabble every hour of theday and that if my master had not thought my life in danger hermajesty would not have got so cheap a bargain. But as I was out of allfear of being illtreated under the protection of so great and good anempress the ornament of nature the darling of the world the delightof her subjects the phnix of the creation so I hoped my latemasters apprehensions would appear to be groundless for I alreadyfound my spirits revive by the influence of her most august presence.This was the sum of my speech delivered with great improprieties andhesitation. The latter part was altogether framed in the style peculiarto that people whereof I learned some phrases from Glumdalclitchwhile she was carrying me to court.The queen giving great allowance for my defectiveness in speakingwas however surprised at so much wit and good sense in so diminutivean animal. She took me in her own hand and carried me to the king whowas then retired to his cabinet. His majesty a prince of much gravityand austere countenance not well observing my shape at first viewasked the queen after a cold manner how long it was since she grewfond of a splacnuck for such it seems he took me to be as I layupon my breast in her majestys right hand. But this princess who hasan infinite deal of wit and humour set me gently on my feet upon thescrutoire and commanded me to give his majesty an account of myselfwhich I did in a very few words and Glumdalclitch who attended at thecabinet door and could not endure I should be out of her sight beingadmitted confirmed all that had passed from my arrival at her fathershouse.The king although he be as learned a person as any in his dominionshad been educated in the study of philosophy and particularlymathematics yet when he observed my shape exactly and saw me walkerect before I began to speak conceived I might be a piece ofclockwork which is in that country arrived to a very greatperfection contrived by some ingenious artist. But when he heard myvoice and found what I delivered to be regular and rational he couldnot conceal his astonishment. He was by no means satisfied with therelation I gave him of the manner I came into his kingdom but thoughtit a story concerted between Glumdalclitch and her father who hadtaught me a set of words to make me sell at a better price. Upon thisimagination he put several other questions to me and still receivedrational answers no otherwise defective than by a foreign accent andan imperfect knowledge in the language with some rustic phrases whichI had learned at the farmers house and did not suit the polite styleof a court.His majesty sent for three great scholars who were then in theirweekly waiting according to the custom in that country. Thesegentlemen after they had a while examined my shape with much nicetywere of different opinions concerning me. They all agreed that I couldnot be produced according to the regular laws of nature because I wasnot framed with a capacity of preserving my life either by swiftnessor climbing of trees or digging holes in the earth. They observed bymy teeth which they viewed with great exactness that I was acarnivorous animal yet most quadrupeds being an overmatch for me andfield mice with some others too nimble they could not imagine how Ishould be able to support myself unless I fed upon snails and otherinsects which they offered by many learned arguments to evince thatI could not possibly do. One of these virtuosi seemed to think that Imight be an embryo or abortive birth. But this opinion was rejected bythe other two who observed my limbs to be perfect and finished andthat I had lived several years as it was manifest from my beard thestumps whereof they plainly discovered through a magnifying glass. Theywould not allow me to be a dwarf because my littleness was beyond alldegrees of comparison for the queens favourite dwarf the smallestever known in that kingdom was near thirty feet high. After muchdebate they concluded unanimously that I was only relplum scalcathwhich is interpreted literally lusus natur a determination exactlyagreeable to the modern philosophy of Europe whose professorsdisdaining the old evasion of occult causes whereby the followers ofAristotle endeavoured in vain to disguise their ignorance haveinvented this wonderful solution of all difficulties to theunspeakable advancement of human knowledge.After this decisive conclusion I entreated to be heard a word or two.I applied myself to the king and assured his majesty that I camefrom a country which abounded with several millions of both sexes andof my own stature where the animals trees and houses were all inproportion and where by consequence I might be as able to defendmyself and to find sustenance as any of his majestys subjects coulddo here which I took for a full answer to those gentlemensarguments. To this they only replied with a smile of contempt sayingthat the farmer had instructed me very well in my lesson. The kingwho had a much better understanding dismissing his learned men sentfor the farmer who by good fortune was not yet gone out of town.Having therefore first examined him privately and then confronted himwith me and the young girl his majesty began to think that what wetold him might possibly be true. He desired the queen to order that aparticular care should be taken of me and was of opinion thatGlumdalclitch should still continue in her office of tending mebecause he observed we had a great affection for each other. Aconvenient apartment was provided for her at court she had a sort ofgoverness appointed to take care of her education a maid to dress herand two other servants for menial offices but the care of me waswholly appropriated to herself. The queen commanded her owncabinetmaker to contrive a box that might serve me for a bedchamberafter the model that Glumdalclitch and I should agree upon. This manwas a most ingenious artist and according to my direction in threeweeks finished for me a wooden chamber of sixteen feet square andtwelve high with sashwindows a door and two closets like a Londonbedchamber. The board that made the ceiling was to be lifted up anddown by two hinges to put in a bed ready furnished by her majestysupholsterer which Glumdalclitch took out every day to air made itwith her own hands and letting it down at night locked up the roofover me. A nice workman who was famous for little curiositiesundertook to make me two chairs with backs and frames of a substancenot unlike ivory and two tables with a cabinet to put my things in.The room was quilted on all sides as well as the floor and theceiling to prevent any accident from the carelessness of those whocarried me and to break the force of a jolt when I went in a coach. Idesired a lock for my door to prevent rats and mice from coming in.The smith after several attempts made the smallest that ever was seenamong them for I have known a larger at the gate of a gentlemanshouse in England. I made a shift to keep the key in a pocket of my ownfearing Glumdalclitch might lose it. The queen likewise ordered thethinnest silks that could be gotten to make me clothes not muchthicker than an English blanket very cumbersome till I was accustomedto them. They were after the fashion of the kingdom partly resemblingthe Persian and partly the Chinese and are a very grave and decenthabit.The queen became so fond of my company that she could not dine withoutme. I had a table placed upon the same at which her majesty ate justat her left elbow and a chair to sit on. Glumdalclitch stood on astool on the floor near my table to assist and take care of me. I hadan entire set of silver dishes and plates and other necessarieswhich in proportion to those of the queen were not much bigger thanwhat I have seen in a London toyshop for the furniture of ababyhouse these my little nurse kept in her pocket in a silver boxand gave me at meals as I wanted them always cleaning them herself. Noperson dined with the queen but the two princesses royal the eldestsixteen years old and the younger at that time thirteen and a month.Her majesty used to put a bit of meat upon one of my dishes out ofwhich I carved for myself and her diversion was to see me eat inminiature for the queen who had indeed but a weak stomach took upat one mouthful as much as a dozen English farmers could eat at ameal which to me was for some time a very nauseous sight. She wouldcraunch the wing of a lark bones and all between her teeth althoughit were nine times as large as that of a fullgrown turkey and put abit of bread into her mouth as big as two twelvepenny loaves. Shedrank out of a golden cup above a hogshead at a draught. Her kniveswere twice as long as a scythe set straight upon the handle. Thespoons forks and other instruments were all in the same proportion.I remember when Glumdalclitch carried me out of curiosity to see someof the tables at court where ten or a dozen of those enormous knivesand forks were lifted up together I thought I had never till thenbeheld so terrible a sight.It is the custom that every Wednesday which as I have observed istheir Sabbath the king and queen with the royal issue of both sexesdine together in the apartment of his majesty to whom I was now becomea great favourite and at these times my little chair and table wereplaced at his left hand before one of the saltcellars. This princetook a pleasure in conversing with me inquiring into the mannersreligion laws government and learning of Europe wherein I gave himthe best account I was able. His apprehension was so clear and hisjudgment so exact that he made very wise reflections and observationsupon all I said. But I confess that after I had been a little toocopious in talking of my own beloved country of our trade and wars bysea and land of our schisms in religion and parties in the state theprejudices of his education prevailed so far that he could not forbeartaking me up in his right hand and stroking me gently with the otherafter a hearty fit of laughing asked me whether I was a whig ortory Then turning to his first minister who waited behind him with awhite staff near as tall as the mainmast of the Royal Sovereign heobserved how contemptible a thing was human grandeur which could bemimicked by such diminutive insects as I and yet says he I dareengage these creatures have their titles and distinctions of honourthey contrive little nests and burrows that they call houses andcities they make a figure in dress and equipage they love theyfight they dispute they cheat they betray And thus he continuedon while my colour came and went several times with indignation tohear our noble country the mistress of arts and arms the scourge ofFrance the arbitress of Europe the seat of virtue piety honour andtruth the pride and envy of the world so contemptuously treated.But as I was not in a condition to resent injuries so upon maturethoughts I began to doubt whether I was injured or no. For afterhaving been accustomed several months to the sight and converse of thispeople and observed every object upon which I cast my eyes to be ofproportionable magnitude the horror I had at first conceived fromtheir bulk and aspect was so far worn off that if I had then beheld acompany of English lords and ladies in their finery and birthdayclothes acting their several parts in the most courtly manner ofstrutting and bowing and prating to say the truth I should havebeen strongly tempted to laugh as much at them as the king and hisgrandees did at me. Neither indeed could I forbear smiling at myselfwhen the queen used to place me upon her hand towards a lookingglassby which both our persons appeared before me in full view together andthere could be nothing more ridiculous than the comparison so that Ireally began to imagine myself dwindled many degrees below my usualsize.Nothing angered and mortified me so much as the queens dwarf whobeing of the lowest stature that was ever in that country for I verilythink he was not full thirty feet high became so insolent at seeing acreature so much beneath him that he would always affect to swaggerand look big as he passed by me in the queens antechamber while I wasstanding on some table talking with the lords or ladies of the courtand he seldom failed of a smart word or two upon my littleness againstwhich I could only revenge myself by calling him brother challenginghim to wrestle and such repartees as are usually in the mouths ofcourt pages. One day at dinner this malicious little cub was sonettled with something I had said to him that raising himself uponthe frame of her majestys chair he took me up by the middle as I wassitting down not thinking any harm and let me drop into a largesilver bowl of cream and then ran away as fast as he could. I fellover head and ears and if I had not been a good swimmer it mighthave gone very hard with me for Glumdalclitch in that instant happenedto be at the other end of the room and the queen was in such a frightthat she wanted presence of mind to assist me. But my little nurse ranto my relief and took me out after I had swallowed above a quart ofcream. I was put to bed however I received no other damage than theloss of a suit of clothes which was utterly spoiled. The dwarf wassoundly whipt and as a farther punishment forced to drink up the bowlof cream into which he had thrown me neither was he ever restored tofavour for soon after the queen bestowed him on a lady of highquality so that I saw him no more to my very great satisfaction forI could not tell to what extremities such a malicious urchin might havecarried his resentment.He had before served me a scurvy trick which set the queen alaughingalthough at the same time she was heartily vexed and would haveimmediately cashiered him if I had not been so generous as tointercede. Her majesty had taken a marrowbone upon her plate andafter knocking out the marrow placed the bone again in the dish erectas it stood before the dwarf watching his opportunity whileGlumdalclitch was gone to the sideboard mounted the stool that shestood on to take care of me at meals took me up in both hands andsqueezing my legs together wedged them into the marrow bone above mywaist where I stuck for some time and made a very ridiculous figure.I believe it was near a minute before any one knew what was become ofme for I thought it below me to cry out. But as princes seldom gettheir meat hot my legs were not scalded only my stockings andbreeches in a sad condition. The dwarf at my entreaty had no otherpunishment than a sound whipping.I was frequently rallied by the queen upon account of my fearfulnessand she used to ask me whether the people of my country were as greatcowards as myself The occasion was this the kingdom is much pesteredwith flies in summer and these odious insects each of them as big asa Dunstable lark hardly gave me any rest while I sat at dinner withtheir continual humming and buzzing about mine ears. They wouldsometimes alight upon my victuals and leave their loathsome excrementor spawn behind which to me was very visible though not to thenatives of that country whose large optics were not so acute as minein viewing smaller objects. Sometimes they would fix upon my nose orforehead where they stung me to the quick smelling very offensivelyand I could easily trace that viscous matter which our naturaliststell us enables those creatures to walk with their feet upwards upon aceiling. I had much ado to defend myself against these detestableanimals and could not forbear starting when they came on my face. Itwas the common practice of the dwarf to catch a number of theseinsects in his hand as schoolboys do among us and let them outsuddenly under my nose on purpose to frighten me and divert thequeen. My remedy was to cut them in pieces with my knife as they flewin the air wherein my dexterity was much admired.I remember one morning when Glumdalclitch had set me in a box upon awindow as she usually did in fair days to give me air for I durst notventure to let the box be hung on a nail out of the window as we dowith cages in England after I had lifted up one of my sashes and satdown at my table to eat a piece of sweet cake for my breakfast abovetwenty wasps allured by the smell came flying into the room humminglouder than the drones of as many bagpipes. Some of them seized mycake and carried it piecemeal away others flew about my head andface confounding me with the noise and putting me in the utmostterror of their stings. However I had the courage to rise and draw myhanger and attack them in the air. I dispatched four of them but therest got away and I presently shut my window. These insects were aslarge as partridges I took out their stings found them an inch and ahalf long and as sharp as needles. I carefully preserved them all andhaving since shown them with some other curiosities in several partsof Europe upon my return to England I gave three of them to GreshamCollege and kept the fourth for myself.CHAPTER IV.The country described. A proposal for correcting modern maps. Thekings palace and some account of the metropolis. The authors way oftravelling. The chief temple described.I now intend to give the reader a short description of this country asfar as I travelled in it which was not above two thousand miles roundLorbrulgrud the metropolis. For the queen whom I always attendednever went farther when she accompanied the king in his progresses andthere staid till his majesty returned from viewing his frontiers. Thewhole extent of this princes dominions reaches about six thousandmiles in length and from three to five in breadth whence I cannot butconclude that our geographers of Europe are in a great error bysupposing nothing but sea between Japan and California for it was evermy opinion that there must be a balance of earth to counterpoise thegreat continent of Tartary and therefore they ought to correct theirmaps and charts by joining this vast tract of land to the northwestparts of America wherein I shall be ready to lend them my assistance.The kingdom is a peninsula terminated to the northeast by a ridge ofmountains thirty miles high which are altogether impassable by reasonof the volcanoes upon the tops neither do the most learned know whatsort of mortals inhabit beyond those mountains or whether they beinhabited at all. On the three other sides it is bounded by the ocean.There is not one seaport in the whole kingdom and those parts of thecoasts into which the rivers issue are so full of pointed rocks andthe sea generally so rough that there is no venturing with thesmallest of their boats so that these people are wholly excluded fromany commerce with the rest of the world. But the large rivers are fullof vessels and abound with excellent fish for they seldom get anyfrom the sea because the sea fish are of the same size with those inEurope and consequently not worth catching whereby it is manifestthat nature in the production of plants and animals of soextraordinary a bulk is wholly confined to this continent of which Ileave the reasons to be determined by philosophers. However now andthen they take a whale that happens to be dashed against the rockswhich the common people feed on heartily. These whales I have known solarge that a man could hardly carry one upon his shoulders andsometimes for curiosity they are brought in hampers to Lorbrulgrud Isaw one of them in a dish at the kings table which passed for ararity but I did not observe he was fond of it for I think indeedthe bigness disgusted him although I have seen one somewhat larger inGreenland.The country is well inhabited for it contains fiftyone cities near ahundred walled towns and a great number of villages. To satisfy mycurious reader it may be sufficient to describe Lorbrulgrud. This citystands upon almost two equal parts on each side the river that passesthrough. It contains above eighty thousand houses and about sixhundred thousand inhabitants. It is in length three glomglungs whichmake about fiftyfour English miles and two and a half in breadth asI measured it myself in the royal map made by the kings order whichwas laid on the ground on purpose for me and extended a hundred feetI paced the diameter and circumference several times barefoot andcomputing by the scale measured it pretty exactly.The kings palace is no regular edifice but a heap of buildings aboutseven miles round the chief rooms are generally two hundred and fortyfeet high and broad and long in proportion. A coach was allowed toGlumdalclitch and me wherein her governess frequently took her out tosee the town or go among the shops and I was always of the partycarried in my box although the girl at my own desire would oftentake me out and hold me in her hand that I might more convenientlyview the houses and the people as we passed along the streets. Ireckoned our coach to be about a square of Westminsterhall but notaltogether so high however I cannot be very exact. One day thegoverness ordered our coachman to stop at several shops where thebeggars watching their opportunity crowded to the sides of the coachand gave me the most horrible spectacle that ever a European eyebeheld. There was a woman with a cancer in her breast swelled to amonstrous size full of holes in two or three of which I could haveeasily crept and covered my whole body. There was a fellow with a wenin his neck larger than five woolpacks and another with a couple ofwooden legs each about twenty feet high. But the most hateful sight ofall was the lice crawling on their clothes. I could see distinctly thelimbs of these vermin with my naked eye much better than those of aEuropean louse through a microscope and their snouts with which theyrooted like swine. They were the first I had ever beheld and I shouldhave been curious enough to dissect one of them if I had had properinstruments which I unluckily left behind me in the ship althoughindeed the sight was so nauseous that it perfectly turned my stomach.Besides the large box in which I was usually carried the queen ordereda smaller one to be made for me of about twelve feet square and tenhigh for the convenience of travelling because the other was somewhattoo large for Glumdalclitchs lap and cumbersome in the coach it wasmade by the same artist whom I directed in the whole contrivance. Thistravellingcloset was an exact square with a window in the middle ofthree of the squares and each window was latticed with iron wire onthe outside to prevent accidents in long journeys. On the fourth sidewhich had no window two strong staples were fixed through which theperson that carried me when I had a mind to be on horseback put aleathern belt and buckled it about his waist. This was always theoffice of some grave trusty servant in whom I could confide whether Iattended the king and queen in their progresses or were disposed tosee the gardens or pay a visit to some great lady or minister of statein the court when Glumdalclitch happened to be out of order for Isoon began to be known and esteemed among the greatest officers Isuppose more upon account of their majesties favour than any merit ofmy own. In journeys when I was weary of the coach a servant onhorseback would buckle on my box and place it upon a cushion beforehim and there I had a full prospect of the country on three sidesfrom my three windows. I had in this closet a fieldbed and ahammock hung from the ceiling two chairs and a table neatly screwedto the floor to prevent being tossed about by the agitation of thehorse or the coach. And having been long used to seavoyages thosemotions although sometimes very violent did not much discompose me.Whenever I had a mind to see the town it was always in mytravellingcloset which Glumdalclitch held in her lap in a kind ofopen sedan after the fashion of the country borne by four men andattended by two others in the queens livery. The people who had oftenheard of me were very curious to crowd about the sedan and the girlwas complaisant enough to make the bearers stop and to take me in herhand that I might be more conveniently seen.I was very desirous to see the chief temple and particularly the towerbelonging to it which is reckoned the highest in the kingdom.Accordingly one day my nurse carried me thither but I may truly say Icame back disappointed for the height is not above three thousandfeet reckoning from the ground to the highest pinnacle top whichallowing for the difference between the size of those people and us inEurope is no great matter for admiration nor at all equal inproportion if I rightly remember to Salisbury steeple. But not todetract from a nation to which during my life I shall acknowledgemyself extremely obliged it must be allowed that whatever this famoustower wants in height is amply made up in beauty and strength for thewalls are near a hundred feet thick built of hewn stone whereof eachis about forty feet square and adorned on all sides with statues ofgods and emperors cut in marble larger than the life placed in theirseveral niches. I measured a little finger which had fallen down fromone of these statues and lay unperceived among some rubbish and foundit exactly four feet and an inch in length. Glumdalclitch wrapped it upin her handkerchief and carried it home in her pocket to keep amongother trinkets of which the girl was very fond as children at her ageusually are.The kings kitchen is indeed a noble building vaulted at top andabout six hundred feet high. The great oven is not so wide by tenpaces as the cupola at St. Pauls for I measured the latter onpurpose after my return. But if I should describe the kitchen gratethe prodigious pots and kettles the joints of meat turning on thespits with many other particulars perhaps I should be hardlybelieved at least a severe critic would be apt to think I enlarged alittle as travellers are often suspected to do. To avoid which censureI fear I have run too much into the other extreme and that if thistreatise should happen to be translated into the language ofBrobdingnag which is the general name of that kingdom andtransmitted thither the king and his people would have reason tocomplain that I had done them an injury by a false and diminutiverepresentation.His majesty seldom keeps above six hundred horses in his stables theyare generally from fiftyfour to sixty feet high. But when he goesabroad on solemn days he is attended for state by a military guardof five hundred horse which indeed I thought was the most splendidsight that could be ever beheld till I saw part of his army inbattalia whereof I shall find another occasion to speak.CHAPTER V.Several adventures that happened to the author. The execution of acriminal. The author shows his skill in navigation.I should have lived happy enough in that country if my littleness hadnot exposed me to several ridiculous and troublesome accidents some ofwhich I shall venture to relate. Glumdalclitch often carried me intothe gardens of the court in my smaller box and would sometimes take meout of it and hold me in her hand or set me down to walk. I rememberbefore the dwarf left the queen he followed us one day into thosegardens and my nurse having set me down he and I being closetogether near some dwarf apple trees I must needs show my wit by asilly allusion between him and the trees which happens to hold intheir language as it does in ours. Whereupon the malicious roguewatching his opportunity when I was walking under one of them shookit directly over my head by which a dozen apples each of them near aslarge as a Bristol barrel came tumbling about my ears one of them hitme on the back as I chanced to stoop and knocked me down flat on myface but I received no other hurt and the dwarf was pardoned at mydesire because I had given the provocation.Another day Glumdalclitch left me on a smooth grassplot to divertmyself while she walked at some distance with her governess. In themeantime there suddenly fell such a violent shower of hail that I wasimmediately by the force of it struck to the ground and when I wasdown the hailstones gave me such cruel bangs all over the body as ifI had been pelted with tennisballs however I made a shift to creepon all fours and shelter myself by lying flat on my face on theleeside of a border of lemonthyme but so bruised from head to footthat I could not go abroad in ten days. Neither is this at all to bewondered at because nature in that country observing the sameproportion through all her operations a hailstone is near eighteenhundred times as large as one in Europe which I can assert uponexperience having been so curious as to weigh and measure them.But a more dangerous accident happened to me in the same garden whenmy little nurse believing she had put me in a secure place which Ioften entreated her to do that I might enjoy my own thoughts andhaving left my box at home to avoid the trouble of carrying it wentto another part of the garden with her governess and some ladies of heracquaintance. While she was absent and out of hearing a small whitespaniel that belonged to one of the chief gardeners having got byaccident into the garden happened to range near the place where I laythe dog following the scent came directly up and taking me in hismouth ran straight to his master wagging his tail and set me gentlyon the ground. By good fortune he had been so well taught that I wascarried between his teeth without the least hurt or even tearing myclothes. But the poor gardener who knew me well and had a greatkindness for me was in a terrible fright he gently took me up in bothhis hands and asked me how I did but I was so amazed and out ofbreath that I could not speak a word. In a few minutes I came tomyself and he carried me safe to my little nurse who by this timehad returned to the place where she left me and was in cruel agonieswhen I did not appear nor answer when she called. She severelyreprimanded the gardener on account of his dog. But the thing washushed up and never known at court for the girl was afraid of thequeens anger and truly as to myself I thought it would not be formy reputation that such a story should go about.This accident absolutely determined Glumdalclitch never to trust meabroad for the future out of her sight. I had been long afraid of thisresolution and therefore concealed from her some little unluckyadventures that happened in those times when I was left by myself.Once a kite hovering over the garden made a stoop at me and if I hadnot resolutely drawn my hanger and run under a thick espalier hewould have certainly carried me away in his talons. Another timewalking to the top of a fresh molehill I fell to my neck in the holethrough which that animal had cast up the earth and coined some lienot worth remembering to excuse myself for spoiling my clothes. Ilikewise broke my right shin against the shell of a snail which Ihappened to stumble over as I was walking alone and thinking on poorEngland.I cannot tell whether I were more pleased or mortified to observe inthose solitary walks that the smaller birds did not appear to be atall afraid of me but would hop about within a yards distance lookingfor worms and other food with as much indifference and security as ifno creature at all were near them. I remember a thrush had theconfidence to snatch out of my hand with his bill a piece of cakethat Glumdalclitch had just given me for my breakfast. When I attemptedto catch any of these birds they would boldly turn against meendeavouring to peck my fingers which I durst not venture within theirreach and then they would hop back unconcerned to hunt for worms orsnails as they did before. But one day I took a thick cudgel andthrew it with all my strength so luckily at a linnet that I knockedhim down and seizing him by the neck with both my hands ran with himin triumph to my nurse. However the bird who had only been stunnedrecovering himself gave me so many boxes with his wings on both sidesof my head and body though I held him at arms length and was out ofthe reach of his claws that I was twenty times thinking to let him go.But I was soon relieved by one of our servants who wrung off thebirds neck and I had him next day for dinner by the queens command.This linnet as near as I can remember seemed to be somewhat largerthan an English swan.The maids of honour often invited Glumdalclitch to their apartmentsand desired she would bring me along with her on purpose to have thepleasure of seeing and touching me. They would often strip me nakedfrom top to toe and lay me at full length in their bosoms wherewith Iwas much disgusted because to say the truth a very offensive smellcame from their skins which I do not mention or intend to thedisadvantage of those excellent ladies for whom I have all manner ofrespect but I conceive that my sense was more acute in proportion tomy littleness and that those illustrious persons were no moredisagreeable to their lovers or to each other than people of the samequality are with us in England. And after all I found their naturalsmell was much more supportable than when they used perfumes underwhich I immediately swooned away. I cannot forget that an intimatefriend of mine in Lilliput took the freedom in a warm day when I hadused a good deal of exercise to complain of a strong smell about mealthough I am as little faulty that way as most of my sex but Isuppose his faculty of smelling was as nice with regard to me as minewas to that of this people. Upon this point I cannot forbear doingjustice to the queen my mistress and Glumdalclitch my nurse whosepersons were as sweet as those of any lady in England.That which gave me most uneasiness among these maids of honour when mynurse carried me to visit them was to see them use me without anymanner of ceremony like a creature who had no sort of consequence forthey would strip themselves to the skin and put on their smocks in mypresence while I was placed on their toilet directly before theirnaked bodies which I am sure to me was very far from being a temptingsight or from giving me any other emotions than those of horror anddisgust their skins appeared so coarse and uneven so variouslycoloured when I saw them near with a mole here and there as broad asa trencher and hairs hanging from it thicker than packthreads to saynothing farther concerning the rest of their persons. Neither did theyat all scruple while I was by to discharge what they had drank tothe quantity of at least two hogsheads in a vessel that held abovethree tuns. The handsomest among these maids of honour a pleasantfrolicsome girl of sixteen would sometimes set me astride upon one ofher nipples with many other tricks wherein the reader will excuse mefor not being over particular. But I was so much displeased that Ientreated Glumdalclitch to contrive some excuse for not seeing thatyoung lady any more.One day a young gentleman who was nephew to my nurses governesscame and pressed them both to see an execution. It was of a man whohad murdered one of that gentlemans intimate acquaintance.Glumdalclitch was prevailed on to be of the company very much againsther inclination for she was naturally tenderhearted and as formyself although I abhorred such kind of spectacles yet my curiositytempted me to see something that I thought must be extraordinary. Themalefactor was fixed in a chair upon a scaffold erected for thatpurpose and his head cut off at one blow with a sword of about fortyfeet long. The veins and arteries spouted up such a prodigious quantityof blood and so high in the air that the great jet deau atVersailles was not equal to it for the time it lasted and the headwhen it fell on the scaffold floor gave such a bounce as made mestart although I was at least half an English mile distant.The queen who often used to hear me talk of my seavoyages and tookall occasions to divert me when I was melancholy asked me whether Iunderstood how to handle a sail or an oar and whether a littleexercise of rowing might not be convenient for my health I answeredthat I understood both very well for although my proper employment hadbeen to be surgeon or doctor to the ship yet often upon a pinch Iwas forced to work like a common mariner. But I could not see how thiscould be done in their country where the smallest wherry was equal toa firstrate man of war among us and such a boat as I could managewould never live in any of their rivers. Her majesty said if I wouldcontrive a boat her own joiner should make it and she would provide aplace for me to sail in. The fellow was an ingenious workman and by myinstructions in ten days finished a pleasureboat with all itstackling able conveniently to hold eight Europeans. When it wasfinished the queen was so delighted that she ran with it in her lapto the king who ordered it to be put into a cistern full of waterwith me in it by way of trial where I could not manage my two scullsor little oars for want of room. But the queen had before contrivedanother project. She ordered the joiner to make a wooden trough ofthree hundred feet long fifty broad and eight deep which being wellpitched to prevent leaking was placed on the floor along the wallin an outer room of the palace. It had a cock near the bottom to letout the water when it began to grow stale and two servants couldeasily fill it in half an hour. Here I often used to row for my owndiversion as well as that of the queen and her ladies who thoughtthemselves well entertained with my skill and agility. Sometimes Iwould put up my sail and then my business was only to steer while theladies gave me a gale with their fans and when they were weary someof their pages would blow my sail forward with their breath while Ishowed my art by steering starboard or larboard as I pleased. When Ihad done Glumdalclitch always carried back my boat into her closetand hung it on a nail to dry.In this exercise I once met an accident which had like to have cost memy life for one of the pages having put my boat into the trough thegoverness who attended Glumdalclitch very officiously lifted me up toplace me in the boat but I happened to slip through her fingers andshould infallibly have fallen down forty feet upon the floor if bythe luckiest chance in the world I had not been stopped by acorkingpin that stuck in the good gentlewomans stomacher the head ofthe pin passing between my shirt and the waistband of my breeches andthus I was held by the middle in the air till Glumdalclitch ran to myrelief.Another time one of the servants whose office it was to fill mytrough every third day with fresh water was so careless as to let ahuge frog not perceiving it slip out of his pail. The frog layconcealed till I was put into my boat but then seeing arestingplace climbed up and made it lean so much on one side that Iwas forced to balance it with all my weight on the other to preventoverturning. When the frog was got in it hopped at once half thelength of the boat and then over my head backward and forwarddaubing my face and clothes with its odious slime. The largeness of itsfeatures made it appear the most deformed animal that can be conceived.However I desired Glumdalclitch to let me deal with it alone. I bangedit a good while with one of my sculls and at last forced it to leapout of the boat.But the greatest danger I ever underwent in that kingdom was from amonkey who belonged to one of the clerks of the kitchen. Glumdalclitchhad locked me up in her closet while she went somewhere upon businessor a visit. The weather being very warm the closetwindow was leftopen as well as the windows and the door of my bigger box in which Iusually lived because of its largeness and conveniency. As I satquietly meditating at my table I heard something bounce in at theclosetwindow and skip about from one side to the other whereatalthough I was much alarmed yet I ventured to look out but notstirring from my seat and then I saw this frolicsome animal friskingand leaping up and down till at last he came to my box which heseemed to view with great pleasure and curiosity peeping in at thedoor and every window. I retreated to the farther corner of my room orbox but the monkey looking in at every side put me in such a frightthat I wanted presence of mind to conceal myself under the bed as Imight easily have done. After some time spent in peeping grinning andchattering he at last espied me and reaching one of his paws in atthe door as a cat does when she plays with a mouse although I oftenshifted place to avoid him he at length seized the lappet of my coatwhich being made of that country silk was very thick and strong anddragged me out. He took me up in his right forefoot and held me as anurse does a child she is going to suckle just as I have seen the samesort of creature do with a kitten in Europe and when I offered tostruggle he squeezed me so hard that I thought it more prudent tosubmit. I have good reason to believe that he took me for a young oneof his own species by his often stroking my face very gently with hisother paw. In these diversions he was interrupted by a noise at thecloset door as if somebody were opening it whereupon he suddenlyleaped up to the window at which he had come in and thence upon theleads and gutters walking upon three legs and holding me in thefourth till he clambered up to a roof that was next to ours. I heardGlumdalclitch give a shriek at the moment he was carrying me out. Thepoor girl was almost distracted that quarter of the palace was all inan uproar the servants ran for ladders the monkey was seen byhundreds in the court sitting upon the ridge of a building holding melike a baby in one of his forepaws and feeding me with the other bycramming into my mouth some victuals he had squeezed out of the bag onone side of his chaps and patting me when I would not eat whereatmany of the rabble below could not forbear laughing neither do I thinkthey justly ought to be blamed for without question the sight wasridiculous enough to every body but myself. Some of the people threw upstones hoping to drive the monkey down but this was strictlyforbidden or else very probably my brains had been dashed out.The ladders were now applied and mounted by several men which themonkey observing and finding himself almost encompassed not beingable to make speed enough with his three legs let me drop on a ridgetile and made his escape. Here I sat for some time five hundred yardsfrom the ground expecting every moment to be blown down by the windor to fall by my own giddiness and come tumbling over and over fromthe ridge to the eaves but an honest lad one of my nurses footmenclimbed up and putting me into his breeches pocket brought me downsafe.I was almost choked with the filthy stuff the monkey had crammed downmy throat but my dear little nurse picked it out of my mouth with asmall needle and then I fell avomiting which gave me great relief.Yet I was so weak and bruised in the sides with the squeezes given meby this odious animal that I was forced to keep my bed a fortnight.The king queen and all the court sent every day to inquire after myhealth and her majesty made me several visits during my sickness. Themonkey was killed and an order made that no such animal should bekept about the palace.When I attended the king after my recovery to return him thanks forhis favours he was pleased to rally me a good deal upon thisadventure. He asked me what my thoughts and speculations were whileI lay in the monkeys paw how I liked the victuals he gave me hismanner of feeding and whether the fresh air on the roof had sharpenedmy stomach. He desired to know what I would have done upon such anoccasion in my own country. I told his majesty that in Europe we hadno monkeys except such as were brought for curiosity from otherplaces and so small that I could deal with a dozen of them togetherif they presumed to attack me. And as for that monstrous animal withwhom I was so lately engaged it was indeed as large as an elephantif my fears had suffered me to think so far as to make use of myhanger looking fiercely and clapping my hand on the hilt as Ispoke when he poked his paw into my chamber perhaps I should havegiven him such a wound as would have made him glad to withdraw it withmore haste than he put it in. This I delivered in a firm tone like aperson who was jealous lest his courage should be called in question.However my speech produced nothing else beside a loud laughter whichall the respect due to his majesty from those about him could not makethem contain. This made me reflect how vain an attempt it is for a manto endeavour to do himself honour among those who are out of all degreeof equality or comparison with him. And yet I have seen the moral of myown behaviour very frequent in England since my return where a littlecontemptible varlet without the least title to birth person wit orcommon sense shall presume to look with importance and put himselfupon a foot with the greatest persons of the kingdom.I was every day furnishing the court with some ridiculous story andGlumdalclitch although she loved me to excess yet was arch enough toinform the queen whenever I committed any folly that she thought wouldbe diverting to her majesty. The girl who had been out of order wascarried by her governess to take the air about an hours distance orthirty miles from town. They alighted out of the coach near a smallfootpath in a field and Glumdalclitch setting down my travelling boxI went out of it to walk. There was a cowdung in the path and I mustneed try my activity by attempting to leap over it. I took a run butunfortunately jumped short and found myself just in the middle up tomy knees. I waded through with some difficulty and one of the footmenwiped me as clean as he could with his handkerchief for I was filthilybemired and my nurse confined me to my box till we returned homewhere the queen was soon informed of what had passed and the footmenspread it about the court so that all the mirth for some days was atmy expense.CHAPTER VI.Several contrivances of the author to please the king and queen. Heshows his skill in music. The king inquires into the state of Englandwhich the author relates to him. The kings observations thereon.I used to attend the kings levee once or twice a week and had oftenseen him under the barbers hand which indeed was at first veryterrible to behold for the razor was almost twice as long as anordinary scythe. His majesty according to the custom of the countrywas only shaved twice a week. I once prevailed on the barber to give mesome of the suds or lather out of which I picked forty or fifty of thestrongest stumps of hair. I then took a piece of fine wood and cut itlike the back of a comb making several holes in it at equal distanceswith as small a needle as I could get from Glumdalclitch. I fixed inthe stumps so artificially scraping and sloping them with my knifetoward the points that I made a very tolerable comb which was aseasonable supply my own being so much broken in the teeth that itwas almost useless neither did I know any artist in that country sonice and exact as would undertake to make me another.And this puts me in mind of an amusement wherein I spent many of myleisure hours. I desired the queens woman to save for me the combingsof her majestys hair whereof in time I got a good quantity andconsulting with my friend the cabinetmaker who had received generalorders to do little jobs for me I directed him to make twochairframes no larger than those I had in my box and to bore littleholes with a fine awl round those parts where I designed the backs andseats through these holes I wove the strongest hairs I could pick outjust after the manner of cane chairs in England. When they werefinished I made a present of them to her majesty who kept them in hercabinet and used to show them for curiosities as indeed they were thewonder of every one that beheld them. The queen would have me sit uponone of these chairs but I absolutely refused to obey her protesting Iwould rather die than place a dishonourable part of my body on thoseprecious hairs that once adorned her majestys head. Of these hairsas I had always a mechanical genius I likewise made a neat littlepurse about five feet long with her majestys name deciphered in goldletters which I gave to Glumdalclitch by the queens consent. To saythe truth it was more for show than use being not of strength to bearthe weight of the larger coins and therefore she kept nothing in itbut some little toys that girls are fond of.The king who delighted in music had frequent concerts at court towhich I was sometimes carried and set in my box on a table to hearthem but the noise was so great that I could hardly distinguish thetunes. I am confident that all the drums and trumpets of a royal armybeating and sounding together just at your ears could not equal it. Mypractice was to have my box removed from the place where the performerssat as far as I could then to shut the doors and windows of it anddraw the window curtains after which I found their music notdisagreeable.I had learned in my youth to play a little upon the spinet.Glumdalclitch kept one in her chamber and a master attended twice aweek to teach her I called it a spinet because it somewhat resembledthat instrument and was played upon in the same manner. A fancy cameinto my head that I would entertain the king and queen with an Englishtune upon this instrument. But this appeared extremely difficult forthe spinet was near sixty feet long each key being almost a foot wideso that with my arms extended I could not reach to above five keys andto press them down required a good smart stroke with my fist whichwould be too great a labour and to no purpose. The method I contrivedwas this I prepared two round sticks about the bigness of commoncudgels they were thicker at one end than the other and I covered thethicker ends with pieces of a mouses skin that by rapping on them Imight neither damage the tops of the keys nor interrupt the sound.Before the spinet a bench was placed about four feet below the keysand I was put upon the bench. I ran sideling upon it that way andthis as fast as I could banging the proper keys with my two sticksand made a shift to play a jig to the great satisfaction of both theirmajesties but it was the most violent exercise I ever underwent andyet I could not strike above sixteen keys nor consequently play thebass and treble together as other artists do which was a greatdisadvantage to my performance.The king who as I before observed was a prince of excellentunderstanding would frequently order that I should be brought in mybox and set upon the table in his closet he would then command me tobring one of my chairs out of the box and sit down within three yardsdistance upon the top of the cabinet which brought me almost to alevel with his face. In this manner I had several conversations withhim. I one day took the freedom to tell his majesty that the contempthe discovered towards Europe and the rest of the world did not seemanswerable to those excellent qualities of mind that he was master ofthat reason did not extend itself with the bulk of the body on thecontrary we observed in our country that the tallest persons wereusually the least provided with it that among other animals bees andants had the reputation of more industry art and sagacity than manyof the larger kinds and that as inconsiderable as he took me to be Ihoped I might live to do his majesty some signal service. The kingheard me with attention and began to conceive a much better opinion ofme than he had ever before. He desired I would give him as exact anaccount of the government of England as I possibly could because asfond as princes commonly are of their own customs for so heconjectured of other monarchs by my former discourses he should beglad to hear of any thing that might deserve imitation.Imagine with thyself courteous reader how often I then wished for thetongue of Demosthenes or Cicero that might have enabled me tocelebrate the praise of my own dear native country in a style equal toits merits and felicity.I began my discourse by informing his majesty that our dominionsconsisted of two islands which composed three mighty kingdoms underone sovereign beside our plantations in America. I dwelt long upon thefertility of our soil and the temperature of our climate. I then spokeat large upon the constitution of an English parliament partly made upof an illustrious body called the House of Peers persons of thenoblest blood and of the most ancient and ample patrimonies. Idescribed that extraordinary care always taken of their education inarts and arms to qualify them for being counsellors both to the kingand kingdom to have a share in the legislature to be members of thehighest court of judicature whence there can be no appeal and to bechampions always ready for the defence of their prince and country bytheir valour conduct and fidelity. That these were the ornament andbulwark of the kingdom worthy followers of their most renownedancestors whose honour had been the reward of their virtue from whichtheir posterity were never once known to degenerate. To these werejoined several holy persons as part of that assembly under the titleof bishops whose peculiar business is to take care of religion and ofthose who instruct the people therein. These were searched and soughtout through the whole nation by the prince and his wisest counsellorsamong such of the priesthood as were most deservedly distinguished bythe sanctity of their lives and the depth of their erudition who wereindeed the spiritual fathers of the clergy and the people.That the other part of the parliament consisted of an assembly calledthe House of Commons who were all principal gentlemen freely pickedand culled out by the people themselves for their great abilities andlove of their country to represent the wisdom of the whole nation. Andthat these two bodies made up the most august assembly in Europe towhom in conjunction with the prince the whole legislature iscommitted.I then descended to the courts of justice over which the judges thosevenerable sages and interpreters of the law presided for determiningthe disputed rights and properties of men as well as for thepunishment of vice and protection of innocence. I mentioned the prudentmanagement of our treasury the valour and achievements of our forcesby sea and land. I computed the number of our people by reckoning howmany millions there might be of each religious sect or political partyamong us. I did not omit even our sports and pastimes or any otherparticular which I thought might redound to the honour of my country.And I finished all with a brief historical account of affairs andevents in England for about a hundred years past.This conversation was not ended under five audiences each of severalhours and the king heard the whole with great attention frequentlytaking notes of what I spoke as well as memorandums of what questionshe intended to ask me.When I had put an end to these long discourses his majesty in a sixthaudience consulting his notes proposed many doubts queries andobjections upon every article. He asked What methods were used tocultivate the minds and bodies of our young nobility and in what kindof business they commonly spent the first and teachable parts of theirlives What course was taken to supply that assembly when any noblefamily became extinct What qualifications were necessary in those whoare to be created new lords whether the humour of the prince a sum ofmoney to a court lady or a design of strengthening a party opposite tothe public interest ever happened to be the motive in thoseadvancements What share of knowledge these lords had in the laws oftheir country and how they came by it so as to enable them to decidethe properties of their fellowsubjects in the last resort Whetherthey were always so free from avarice partialities or want that abribe or some other sinister view could have no place among themWhether those holy lords I spoke of were always promoted to that rankupon account of their knowledge in religious matters and the sanctityof their lives had never been compliers with the times while theywere common priests or slavish prostitute chaplains to some noblemanwhose opinions they continued servilely to follow after they wereadmitted into that assemblyHe then desired to know What arts were practised in electing thosewhom I called commoners whether a stranger with a strong purse mightnot influence the vulgar voters to choose him before their ownlandlord or the most considerable gentleman in the neighbourhood Howit came to pass that people were so violently bent upon getting intothis assembly which I allowed to be a great trouble and expense oftento the ruin of their families without any salary or pension becausethis appeared such an exalted strain of virtue and public spirit thathis majesty seemed to doubt it might possibly not be always sincere.And he desired to know Whether such zealous gentlemen could have anyviews of refunding themselves for the charges and trouble they were atby sacrificing the public good to the designs of a weak and viciousprince in conjunction with a corrupted ministry He multiplied hisquestions and sifted me thoroughly upon every part of this headproposing numberless inquiries and objections which I think it notprudent or convenient to repeat.Upon what I said in relation to our courts of justice his majestydesired to be satisfied in several points and this I was the betterable to do having been formerly almost ruined by a long suit inchancery which was decreed for me with costs. He asked What time wasusually spent in determining between right and wrong and what degreeof expense Whether advocates and orators had liberty to plead incauses manifestly known to be unjust vexatious or oppressive Whetherparty in religion or politics were observed to be of any weight inthe scale of justice Whether those pleading orators were personseducated in the general knowledge of equity or only in provincialnational and other local customs Whether they or their judges had anypart in penning those laws which they assumed the liberty ofinterpreting and glossing upon at their pleasure Whether they hadever at different times pleaded for and against the same cause andcited precedents to prove contrary opinions Whether they were a richor a poor corporation Whether they received any pecuniary reward forpleading or delivering their opinions And particularly whether theywere ever admitted as members in the lower senateHe fell next upon the management of our treasury and said he thoughtmy memory had failed me because I computed our taxes at about five orsix millions a year and when I came to mention the issues he foundthey sometimes amounted to more than double for the notes he had takenwere very particular in this point because he hoped as he told methat the knowledge of our conduct might be useful to him and he couldnot be deceived in his calculations. But if what I told him were truehe was still at a loss how a kingdom could run out of its estate likea private person. He asked me who were our creditors and where wefound money to pay them He wondered to hear me talk of suchchargeable and expensive wars that certainly we must be a quarrelsomepeople or live among very bad neighbours and that our generals mustneeds be richer than our kings. He asked what business we had out ofour own islands unless upon the score of trade or treaty or todefend the coasts with our fleet Above all he was amazed to hear metalk of a mercenary standing army in the midst of peace and among afree people. He said if we were governed by our own consent in thepersons of our representatives he could not imagine of whom we wereafraid or against whom we were to fight and would hear my opinionwhether a private mans house might not be better defended by himselfhis children and family than by halfadozen rascals picked up at aventure in the streets for small wages who might get a hundred timesmore by cutting their throatsHe laughed at my odd kind of arithmetic as he was pleased to callit in reckoning the numbers of our people by a computation drawnfrom the several sects among us in religion and politics. He saidhe knew no reason why those who entertain opinions prejudicial to thepublic should be obliged to change or should not be obliged toconceal them. And as it was tyranny in any government to require thefirst so it was weakness not to enforce the second for a man may beallowed to keep poisons in his closet but not to vend them about forcordials.He observed that among the diversions of our nobility and gentry Ihad mentioned gaming he desired to know at what age this entertainmentwas usually taken up and when it was laid down how much of their timeit employed whether it ever went so high as to affect their fortuneswhether mean vicious people by their dexterity in that art might notarrive at great riches and sometimes keep our very nobles independence as well as habituate them to vile companions wholly takethem from the improvement of their minds and force them by the lossesthey received to learn and practise that infamous dexterity uponothersHe was perfectly astonished with the historical account I gave him ofour affairs during the last century protesting it was only a heap ofconspiracies rebellions murders massacres revolutions banishmentsthe very worst effects that avarice faction hypocrisyperfidiousness cruelty rage madness hatred envy lust malice andambition could produce.His majesty in another audience was at the pains to recapitulate thesum of all I had spoken compared the questions he made with theanswers I had given then taking me into his hands and stroking megently delivered himself in these words which I shall never forgetnor the manner he spoke them in My little friend Grildrig you havemade a most admirable panegyric upon your country you have clearlyproved that ignorance idleness and vice are the proper ingredientsfor qualifying a legislator that laws are best explained interpretedand applied by those whose interest and abilities lie in pervertingconfounding and eluding them. I observe among you some lines of aninstitution which in its original might have been tolerable butthese half erased and the rest wholly blurred and blotted bycorruptions. It does not appear from all you have said how any oneperfection is required toward the procurement of any one station amongyou much less that men are ennobled on account of their virtue thatpriests are advanced for their piety or learning soldiers for theirconduct or valour judges for their integrity senators for the loveof their country or counsellors for their wisdom. As for yourselfcontinued the king who have spent the greatest part of your life intravelling I am well disposed to hope you may hitherto have escapedmany vices of your country. But by what I have gathered from your ownrelation and the answers I have with much pains wrung and extortedfrom you I cannot but conclude the bulk of your natives to be the mostpernicious race of little odious vermin that nature ever suffered tocrawl upon the surface of the earth.CHAPTER VII.The authors love of his country. He makes a proposal of much advantageto the king which is rejected. The kings great ignorance in politics.The learning of that country very imperfect and confined. The laws andmilitary affairs and parties in the state.Nothing but an extreme love of truth could have hindered me fromconcealing this part of my story. It was in vain to discover myresentments which were always turned into ridicule and I was forcedto rest with patience while my noble and beloved country was soinjuriously treated. I am as heartily sorry as any of my readers canpossibly be that such an occasion was given but this prince happenedto be so curious and inquisitive upon every particular that it couldnot consist either with gratitude or good manners to refuse giving himwhat satisfaction I was able. Yet thus much I may be allowed to say inmy own vindication that I artfully eluded many of his questions andgave to every point a more favourable turn by many degrees than thestrictness of truth would allow. For I have always borne that laudablepartiality to my own country which Dionysius Halicarnassensis with somuch justice recommends to an historian I would hide the frailtiesand deformities of my political mother and place her virtues andbeauties in the most advantageous light. This was my sincere endeavourin those many discourses I had with that monarch although itunfortunately failed of success.But great allowances should be given to a king who lives whollysecluded from the rest of the world and must therefore be altogetherunacquainted with the manners and customs that most prevail in othernations the want of which knowledge will ever produce many prejudicesand a certain narrowness of thinking from which we and the politercountries of Europe are wholly exempted. And it would be hard indeedif so remote a princes notions of virtue and vice were to be offeredas a standard for all mankind.To confirm what I have now said and further to show the miserableeffects of a confined education I shall here insert a passage whichwill hardly obtain belief. In hopes to ingratiate myself further intohis majestys favour I told him of an invention discovered betweenthree and four hundred years ago to make a certain powder into a heapof which the smallest spark of fire falling would kindle the whole ina moment although it were as big as a mountain and make it all fly upin the air together with a noise and agitation greater than thunder.That a proper quantity of this powder rammed into a hollow tube ofbrass or iron according to its bigness would drive a ball of iron orlead with such violence and speed as nothing was able to sustain itsforce. That the largest balls thus discharged would not only destroywhole ranks of an army at once but batter the strongest walls to theground sink down ships with a thousand men in each to the bottom ofthe sea and when linked together by a chain would cut through mastsand rigging divide hundreds of bodies in the middle and lay all wastebefore them. That we often put this powder into large hollow balls ofiron and discharged them by an engine into some city we werebesieging which would rip up the pavements tear the houses to piecesburst and throw splinters on every side dashing out the brains of allwho came near. That I knew the ingredients very well which were cheapand common I understood the manner of compounding them and coulddirect his workmen how to make those tubes of a size proportionable toall other things in his majestys kingdom and the largest need not beabove a hundred feet long twenty or thirty of which tubes chargedwith the proper quantity of powder and balls would batter down thewalls of the strongest town in his dominions in a few hours or destroythe whole metropolis if ever it should pretend to dispute his absolutecommands. This I humbly offered to his majesty as a small tribute ofacknowledgment in turn for so many marks that I had received of hisroyal favour and protection.The king was struck with horror at the description I had given of thoseterrible engines and the proposal I had made. He was amazed how soimpotent and grovelling an insect as I these were his expressionscould entertain such inhuman ideas and in so familiar a manner as toappear wholly unmoved at all the scenes of blood and desolation which Ihad painted as the common effects of those destructive machineswhereof he said some evil genius enemy to mankind must have beenthe first contriver. As for himself he protested that although fewthings delighted him so much as new discoveries in art or in natureyet he would rather lose half his kingdom than be privy to such asecret which he commanded me as I valued any life never to mentionany more.A strange effect of narrow principles and views that a princepossessed of every quality which procures veneration love and esteemof strong parts great wisdom and profound learning endowed withadmirable talents and almost adored by his subjects should from anice unnecessary scruple whereof in Europe we can have no conceptionlet slip an opportunity put into his hands that would have made himabsolute master of the lives the liberties and the fortunes of hispeople Neither do I say this with the least intention to detract fromthe many virtues of that excellent king whose character I amsensible will on this account be very much lessened in the opinionof an English reader but I take this defect among them to have risenfrom their ignorance by not having hitherto reduced politics into ascience as the more acute wits of Europe have done. For I remembervery well in a discourse one day with the king when I happened tosay there were several thousand books among us written upon the artof government it gave him directly contrary to my intention a verymean opinion of our understandings. He professed both to abominate anddespise all mystery refinement and intrigue either in a prince or aminister. He could not tell what I meant by secrets of state where anenemy or some rival nation were not in the case. He confined theknowledge of governing within very narrow bounds to common sense andreason to justice and lenity to the speedy determination of civil andcriminal causes with some other obvious topics which are not worthconsidering. And he gave it for his opinion that whoever could maketwo ears of corn or two blades of grass to grow upon a spot of groundwhere only one grew before would deserve better of mankind and domore essential service to his country than the whole race ofpoliticians put together.The learning of this people is very defective consisting only inmorality history poetry and mathematics wherein they must beallowed to excel. But the last of these is wholly applied to what maybe useful in life to the improvement of agriculture and allmechanical arts so that among us it would be little esteemed. And asto ideas entities abstractions and transcendentals I could neverdrive the least conception into their heads.No law in that country must exceed in words the number of letters intheir alphabet which consists only of two and twenty. But indeed fewof them extend even to that length. They are expressed in the mostplain and simple terms wherein those people are not mercurial enoughto discover above one interpretation and to write a comment upon anylaw is a capital crime. As to the decision of civil causes orproceedings against criminals their precedents are so few that theyhave little reason to boast of any extraordinary skill in either.They have had the art of printing as well as the Chinese time out ofmind but their libraries are not very large for that of the kingwhich is reckoned the largest does not amount to above a thousandvolumes placed in a gallery of twelve hundred feet long whence I hadliberty to borrow what books I pleased. The queens joiner hadcontrived in one of Glumdalclitchs rooms a kind of wooden machinefiveandtwenty feet high formed like a standing ladder the stepswere each fifty feet long. It was indeed a moveable pair of stairs thelowest end placed at ten feet distance from the wall of the chamber.The book I had a mind to read was put up leaning against the wall Ifirst mounted to the upper step of the ladder and turning my facetowards the book began at the top of the page and so walking to theright and left about eight or ten paces according to the length of thelines till I had gotten a little below the level of my eyes and thendescending gradually till I came to the bottom after which I mountedagain and began the other page in the same manner and so turned overthe leaf which I could easily do with both my hands for it was asthick and stiff as a pasteboard and in the largest folios not aboveeighteen or twenty feet long.Their style is clear masculine and smooth but not florid for theyavoid nothing more than multiplying unnecessary words or using variousexpressions. I have perused many of their books especially those inhistory and morality. Among the rest I was much diverted with a littleold treatise which always lay in Glumdalclitchs bed chamber andbelonged to her governess a grave elderly gentlewoman who dealt inwritings of morality and devotion. The book treats of the weakness ofhumankind and is in little esteem except among the women and thevulgar. However I was curious to see what an author of that countrycould say upon such a subject. This writer went through all the usualtopics of European moralists showing how diminutive contemptibleand helpless an animal was man in his own nature how unable to defendhimself from inclemencies of the air or the fury of wild beasts howmuch he was excelled by one creature in strength by another in speedby a third in foresight by a fourth in industry. He added thatnature was degenerated in these latter declining ages of the world andcould now produce only small abortive births in comparison of those inancient times. He said it was very reasonable to think not only thatthe species of men were originally much larger but also that theremust have been giants in former ages which as it is asserted byhistory and tradition so it has been confirmed by huge bones andskulls casually dug up in several parts of the kingdom far exceedingthe common dwindled race of men in our days. He argued that the verylaws of nature absolutely required we should have been made in thebeginning of a size more large and robust not so liable to destructionfrom every little accident of a tile falling from a house or a stonecast from the hand of a boy or being drowned in a little brook. Fromthis way of reasoning the author drew several moral applicationsuseful in the conduct of life but needless here to repeat. For my ownpart I could not avoid reflecting how universally this talent wasspread of drawing lectures in morality or indeed rather matter ofdiscontent and repining from the quarrels we raise with nature. And Ibelieve upon a strict inquiry those quarrels might be shown asillgrounded among us as they are among that people.As to their military affairs they boast that the kings army consistsof a hundred and seventysix thousand foot and thirtytwo thousandhorse if that may be called an army which is made up of tradesmen inthe several cities and farmers in the country whose commanders areonly the nobility and gentry without pay or reward. They are indeedperfect enough in their exercises and under very good disciplinewherein I saw no great merit for how should it be otherwise whereevery farmer is under the command of his own landlord and everycitizen under that of the principal men in his own city chosen afterthe manner of Venice by ballotI have often seen the militia of Lorbrulgrud drawn out to exercise ina great field near the city of twenty miles square. They were in allnot above twentyfive thousand foot and six thousand horse but it wasimpossible for me to compute their number considering the space ofground they took up. A cavalier mounted on a large steed might beabout ninety feet high. I have seen this whole body of horse upon aword of command draw their swords at once and brandish them in theair. Imagination can figure nothing so grand so surprising and soastonishing It looked as if ten thousand flashes of lightning weredarting at the same time from every quarter of the sky.I was curious to know how this prince to whose dominions there is noaccess from any other country came to think of armies or to teach hispeople the practice of military discipline. But I was soon informedboth by conversation and reading their histories for in the course ofmany ages they have been troubled with the same disease to which thewhole race of mankind is subject the nobility often contending forpower the people for liberty and the king for absolute dominion. Allwhich however happily tempered by the laws of that kingdom have beensometimes violated by each of the three parties and have more thanonce occasioned civil wars the last whereof was happily put an end toby this princes grandfather in a general composition and themilitia then settled with common consent has been ever since kept inthe strictest duty.CHAPTER VIII.The king and queen make a progress to the frontiers. The author attendsthem. The manner in which he leaves the country very particularlyrelated. He returns to England.I had always a strong impulse that I should some time recover myliberty though it was impossible to conjecture by what means or toform any project with the least hope of succeeding. The ship in which Isailed was the first ever known to be driven within sight of thatcoast and the king had given strict orders that if at any timeanother appeared it should be taken ashore and with all its crew andpassengers brought in a tumbril to Lorbrulgrud. He was strongly bent toget me a woman of my own size by whom I might propagate the breed butI think I should rather have died than undergone the disgrace ofleaving a posterity to be kept in cages like tame canarybirds andperhaps in time sold about the kingdom to persons of quality forcuriosities. I was indeed treated with much kindness I was thefavourite of a great king and queen and the delight of the wholecourt but it was upon such a foot as ill became the dignity ofhumankind. I could never forget those domestic pledges I had leftbehind me. I wanted to be among people with whom I could converse uponeven terms and walk about the streets and fields without being afraidof being trod to death like a frog or a young puppy. But my deliverancecame sooner than I expected and in a manner not very common the wholestory and circumstances of which I shall faithfully relate.I had now been two years in this country and about the beginning ofthe third Glumdalclitch and I attended the king and queen in aprogress to the south coast of the kingdom. I was carried as usual inmy travellingbox which as I have already described was a veryconvenient closet of twelve feet wide. And I had ordered a hammock tobe fixed by silken ropes from the four corners at the top to breakthe jolts when a servant carried me before him on horseback as Isometimes desired and would often sleep in my hammock while we wereupon the road. On the roof of my closet not directly over the middleof the hammock I ordered the joiner to cut out a hole of a footsquare to give me air in hot weather as I slept which hole I shut atpleasure with a board that drew backward and forward through a groove.When we came to our journeys end the king thought proper to pass afew days at a palace he has near Flanflasnic a city within eighteenEnglish miles of the seaside. Glumdalclitch and I were much fatigued Ihad gotten a small cold but the poor girl was so ill as to be confinedto her chamber. I longed to see the ocean which must be the only sceneof my escape if ever it should happen. I pretended to be worse than Ireally was and desired leave to take the fresh air of the sea with apage whom I was very fond of and who had sometimes been trusted withme. I shall never forget with what unwillingness Glumdalclitchconsented nor the strict charge she gave the page to be careful of mebursting at the same time into a flood of tears as if she had someforboding of what was to happen. The boy took me out in my box abouthalf an hours walk from the palace towards the rocks on theseashore. I ordered him to set me down and lifting up one of mysashes cast many a wistful melancholy look towards the sea. I foundmyself not very well and told the page that I had a mind to take a napin my hammock which I hoped would do me good. I got in and the boyshut the window close down to keep out the cold. I soon fell asleepand all I can conjecture is while I slept the page thinking nodanger could happen went among the rocks to look for birds eggshaving before observed him from my window searching about and pickingup one or two in the clefts. Be that as it will I found myselfsuddenly awaked with a violent pull upon the ring which was fastenedat the top of my box for the conveniency of carriage. I felt my boxraised very high in the air and then borne forward with prodigiousspeed. The first jolt had like to have shaken me out of my hammock butafterward the motion was easy enough. I called out several times asloud as I could raise my voice but all to no purpose. I looked towardsmy windows and could see nothing but the clouds and sky. I heard anoise just over my head like the clapping of wings and then began toperceive the woful condition I was in that some eagle had got the ringof my box in his beak with an intent to let it fall on a rock like atortoise in a shell and then pick out my body and devour it for thesagacity and smell of this bird enables him to discover his quarry at agreat distance though better concealed than I could be within atwoinch board.In a little time I observed the noise and flutter of wings to increasevery fast and my box was tossed up and down like a sign in a windyday. I heard several bangs or buffets as I thought given to the eaglefor such I am certain it must have been that held the ring of my boxin his beak and then all on a sudden felt myself fallingperpendicularly down for above a minute but with such incredibleswiftness that I almost lost my breath. My fall was stopped by aterrible squash that sounded louder to my ears than the cataract ofNiagara after which I was quite in the dark for another minute andthen my box began to rise so high that I could see light from the topsof the windows. I now perceived I was fallen into the sea. My box bythe weight of my body the goods that were in and the broad plates ofiron fixed for strength at the four corners of the top and bottomfloated about five feet deep in water. I did then and do now supposethat the eagle which flew away with my box was pursued by two or threeothers and forced to let me drop while he defended himself againstthe rest who hoped to share in the prey. The plates of iron fastenedat the bottom of the box for those were the strongest preserved thebalance while it fell and hindered it from being broken on the surfaceof the water. Every joint of it was well grooved and the door did notmove on hinges but up and down like a sash which kept my closet sotight that very little water came in. I got with much difficulty out ofmy hammock having first ventured to draw back the slipboard on theroof already mentioned contrived on purpose to let in air for want ofwhich I found myself almost stifled.How often did I then wish myself with my dear Glumdalclitch from whomone single hour had so far divided me And I may say with truth thatin the midst of my own misfortunes I could not forbear lamenting mypoor nurse the grief she would suffer for my loss the displeasure ofthe queen and the ruin of her fortune. Perhaps many travellers havenot been under greater difficulties and distress than I was at thisjuncture expecting every moment to see my box dashed to pieces or atleast overset by the first violent blast or rising wave. A breach inone single pane of glass would have been immediate death nor could anything have preserved the windows but the strong lattice wires placedon the outside against accidents in travelling. I saw the water oozein at several crannies although the leaks were not considerable and Iendeavoured to stop them as well as I could. I was not able to lift upthe roof of my closet which otherwise I certainly should have doneand sat on the top of it where I might at least preserve myself somehours longer than by being shut up as I may call it in the hold. Orif I escaped these dangers for a day or two what could I expect but amiserable death of cold and hunger I was four hours under thesecircumstances expecting and indeed wishing every moment to be mylast.I have already told the reader that there were two strong staples fixedupon that side of my box which had no window and into which theservant who used to carry me on horseback would put a leathern beltand buckle it about his waist. Being in this disconsolate state Iheard or at least thought I heard some kind of grating noise on thatside of my box where the staples were fixed and soon after I began tofancy that the box was pulled or towed along the sea for I now andthen felt a sort of tugging which made the waves rise near the tops ofmy windows leaving me almost in the dark. This gave me some fainthopes of relief although I was not able to imagine how it could bebrought about. I ventured to unscrew one of my chairs which werealways fastened to the floor and having made a hard shift to screw itdown again directly under the slippingboard that I had lately openedI mounted on the chair and putting my mouth as near as I could to thehole I called for help in a loud voice and in all the languages Iunderstood. I then fastened my handkerchief to a stick I usuallycarried and thrusting it up the hole waved it several times in theair that if any boat or ship were near the seamen might conjecturesome unhappy mortal to be shut up in the box.I found no effect from all I could do but plainly perceived my closetto be moved along and in the space of an hour or better that side ofthe box where the staples were and had no windows struck againstsomething that was hard. I apprehended it to be a rock and foundmyself tossed more than ever. I plainly heard a noise upon the cover ofmy closet like that of a cable and the grating of it as it passedthrough the ring. I then found myself hoisted up by degrees at leastthree feet higher than I was before. Whereupon I again thrust up mystick and handkerchief calling for help till I was almost hoarse. Inreturn to which I heard a great shout repeated three times giving mesuch transports of joy as are not to be conceived but by those who feelthem. I now heard a trampling over my head and somebody callingthrough the hole with a loud voice in the English tongue If there beany body below let them speak. I answered I was an Englishmandrawn by ill fortune into the greatest calamity that ever any creatureunderwent and begged by all that was moving to be delivered out ofthe dungeon I was in. The voice replied I was safe for my box wasfastened to their ship and the carpenter should immediately come andsaw a hole in the cover large enough to pull me out. I answeredthat was needless and would take up too much time for there was nomore to be done but let one of the crew put his finger into the ringand take the box out of the sea into the ship and so into thecaptains cabin. Some of them upon hearing me talk so wildly thoughtI was mad others laughed for indeed it never came into my head thatI was now got among people of my own stature and strength. Thecarpenter came and in a few minutes sawed a passage about four feetsquare then let down a small ladder upon which I mounted and thencewas taken into the ship in a very weak condition.The sailors were all in amazement and asked me a thousand questionswhich I had no inclination to answer. I was equally confounded at thesight of so many pigmies for such I took them to be after having solong accustomed my eyes to the monstrous objects I had left. But thecaptain Mr. Thomas Wilcocks an honest worthy Shropshire manobserving I was ready to faint took me into his cabin gave me acordial to comfort me and made me turn in upon his own bed advisingme to take a little rest of which I had great need. Before I went tosleep I gave him to understand that I had some valuable furniture inmy box too good to be lost a fine hammock a handsome fieldbed twochairs a table and a cabinet that my closet was hung on all sidesor rather quilted with silk and cotton that if he would let one ofthe crew bring my closet into his cabin I would open it there beforehim and show him my goods. The captain hearing me utter theseabsurdities concluded I was raving however I suppose to pacify mehe promised to give order as I desired and going upon deck sent someof his men down into my closet whence as I afterwards found theydrew up all my goods and stripped off the quilting but the chairscabinet and bedstead being screwed to the floor were much damaged bythe ignorance of the seamen who tore them up by force. Then theyknocked off some of the boards for the use of the ship and when theyhad got all they had a mind for let the hull drop into the sea whichby reason of many breaches made in the bottom and sides sunk torights. And indeed I was glad not to have been a spectator of thehavoc they made because I am confident it would have sensibly touchedme by bringing former passages into my mind which I would rather haveforgot.I slept some hours but perpetually disturbed with dreams of the placeI had left and the dangers I had escaped. However upon waking Ifound myself much recovered. It was now about eight oclock at nightand the captain ordered supper immediately thinking I had alreadyfasted too long. He entertained me with great kindness observing menot to look wildly or talk inconsistently and when we were leftalone desired I would give him a relation of my travels and by whataccident I came to be set adrift in that monstrous wooden chest. Hesaid that about twelve oclock at noon as he was looking through hisglass he spied it at a distance and thought it was a sail which hehad a mind to make being not much out of his course in hopes ofbuying some biscuit his own beginning to fall short. That upon comingnearer and finding his error he sent out his longboat to discoverwhat it was that his men came back in a fright swearing they had seena swimming house. That he laughed at their folly and went himself inthe boat ordering his men to take a strong cable along with them. Thatthe weather being calm he rowed round me several times observed mywindows and wire lattices that defended them. That he discovered twostaples upon one side which was all of boards without any passage forlight. He then commanded his men to row up to that side and fasteninga cable to one of the staples ordered them to tow my chest as theycalled it toward the ship. When it was there he gave directions tofasten another cable to the ring fixed in the cover and to raise up mychest with pulleys which all the sailors were not able to do above twoor three feet. He said they saw my stick and handkerchief thrust outof the hole and concluded that some unhappy man must be shut up in thecavity. I asked whether he or the crew had seen any prodigious birdsin the air about the time he first discovered me. To which heanswered that discoursing this matter with the sailors while I wasasleep one of them said he had observed three eagles flying towardsthe north but remarked nothing of their being larger than the usualsize which I suppose must be imputed to the great height they wereat and he could not guess the reason of my question. I then asked thecaptain how far he reckoned we might be from land He said by thebest computation he could make we were at least a hundred leagues. Iassured him that he must be mistaken by almost half for I had notleft the country whence I came above two hours before I dropped intothe sea. Whereupon he began again to think that my brain wasdisturbed of which he gave me a hint and advised me to go to bed in acabin he had provided. I assured him I was well refreshed with hisgood entertainment and company and as much in my senses as ever I wasin my life. He then grew serious and desired to ask me freelywhether I were not troubled in my mind by the consciousness of someenormous crime for which I was punished at the command of someprince by exposing me in that chest as great criminals in othercountries have been forced to sea in a leaky vessel withoutprovisions for although he should be sorry to have taken so ill a maninto his ship yet he would engage his word to set me safe ashore inthe first port where we arrived. He added that his suspicions weremuch increased by some very absurd speeches I had delivered at first tohis sailors and afterwards to himself in relation to my closet orchest as well as by my odd looks and behaviour while I was at supper.I begged his patience to hear me tell my story which I faithfully didfrom the last time I left England to the moment he first discoveredme. And as truth always forces its way into rational minds so thishonest worthy gentleman who had some tincture of learning and verygood sense was immediately convinced of my candour and veracity. Butfurther to confirm all I had said I entreated him to give order thatmy cabinet should be brought of which I had the key in my pocket forhe had already informed me how the seamen disposed of my closet. Iopened it in his own presence and showed him the small collection ofrarities I made in the country from which I had been so strangelydelivered. There was the comb I had contrived out of the stumps of thekings beard and another of the same materials but fixed into aparing of her majestys thumbnail which served for the back. Therewas a collection of needles and pins from a foot to half a yard longfour wasp stings like joiners tacks some combings of the queenshair a gold ring which one day she made me a present of in a mostobliging manner taking it from her little finger and throwing it overmy head like a collar. I desired the captain would please to acceptthis ring in return for his civilities which he absolutely refused. Ishowed him a corn that I had cut off with my own hand from a maid ofhonours toe it was about the bigness of Kentish pippin and grown sohard that when I returned to England I got it hollowed into a cupand set in silver. Lastly I desired him to see the breeches I had thenon which were made of a mouses skin.I could force nothing on him but a footmans tooth which I observedhim to examine with great curiosity and found he had a fancy for it.He received it with abundance of thanks more than such a trifle coulddeserve. It was drawn by an unskilful surgeon in a mistake from oneof Glumdalclitchs men who was afflicted with the toothache but itwas as sound as any in his head. I got it cleaned and put it into mycabinet. It was about a foot long and four inches in diameter.The captain was very well satisfied with this plain relation I hadgiven him and said he hoped when we returned to England I wouldoblige the world by putting it on paper and making it public. Myanswer was that we were overstocked with books of travels thatnothing could now pass which was not extraordinary wherein I doubtedsome authors less consulted truth than their own vanity or interestor the diversion of ignorant readers that my story could containlittle beside common events without those ornamental descriptions ofstrange plants trees birds and other animals or of the barbarouscustoms and idolatry of savage people with which most writers abound.However I thanked him for his good opinion and promised to take thematter into my thoughts.He said he wondered at one thing very much which was to hear mespeak so loud asking me whether the king or queen of that countrywere thick of hearing I told him it was what I had been used to forabove two years past and that I admired as much at the voices of himand his men who seemed to me only to whisper and yet I could hearthem well enough. But when I spoke in that country it was like a mantalking in the streets to another looking out from the top of asteeple unless when I was placed on a table or held in any personshand. I told him I had likewise observed another thing that when Ifirst got into the ship and the sailors stood all about me I thoughtthey were the most little contemptible creatures I had ever beheld.For indeed while I was in that princes country I could never endureto look in a glass after my eyes had been accustomed to suchprodigious objects because the comparison gave me so despicable aconceit of myself. The captain said that while we were at supper heobserved me to look at every thing with a sort of wonder and that Ioften seemed hardly able to contain my laughter which he knew not wellhow to take but imputed it to some disorder in my brain. I answeredit was very true and I wondered how I could forbear when I saw hisdishes of the size of a silver threepence a leg of pork hardly amouthful a cup not so big as a nutshell and so I went ondescribing the rest of his householdstuff and provisions after thesame manner. For although the queen had ordered a little equipage ofall things necessary for me while I was in her service yet my ideaswere wholly taken up with what I saw on every side of me and I winkedat my own littleness as people do at their own faults. The captainunderstood my raillery very well and merrily replied with the oldEnglish proverb that he doubted my eyes were bigger than my bellyfor he did not observe my stomach so good although I had fasted allday and continuing in his mirth protested he would have gladlygiven a hundred pounds to have seen my closet in the eagles bill andafterwards in its fall from so great a height into the sea which wouldcertainly have been a most astonishing object worthy to have thedescription of it transmitted to future ages and the comparison ofPhaeton was so obvious that he could not forbear applying it althoughI did not much admire the conceit.The captain having been at Tonquin was in his return to Englanddriven northeastward to the latitude of degrees and longitude of. But meeting a tradewind two days after I came on board him wesailed southward a long time and coasting New Holland kept our coursewestsouthwest and then southsouthwest till we doubled the Cape ofGood Hope. Our voyage was very prosperous but I shall not trouble thereader with a journal of it. The captain called in at one or two portsand sent in his longboat for provisions and fresh water but I neverwent out of the ship till we came into the Downs which was on thethird day of June about nine months after my escape. I offeredto leave my goods in security for payment of my freight but thecaptain protested he would not receive one farthing. We took a kindleave of each other and I made him promise he would come to see me atmy house in Redriff. I hired a horse and guide for five shillingswhich I borrowed of the captain.As I was on the road observing the littleness of the houses thetrees the cattle and the people I began to think myself in Lilliput.I was afraid of trampling on every traveller I met and often calledaloud to have them stand out of the way so that I had like to havegotten one or two broken heads for my impertinence.When I came to my own house for which I was forced to inquire one ofthe servants opening the door I bent down to go in like a gooseunder a gate for fear of striking my head. My wife ran out to embraceme but I stooped lower than her knees thinking she could otherwisenever be able to reach my mouth. My daughter kneeled to ask myblessing but I could not see her till she arose having been so longused to stand with my head and eyes erect to above sixty feet and thenI went to take her up with one hand by the waist. I looked down uponthe servants and one or two friends who were in the house as if theyhad been pigmies and I a giant. I told my wife she had been toothrifty for I found she had starved herself and her daughter tonothing. In short I behaved myself so unaccountably that they wereall of the captains opinion when he first saw me and concluded I hadlost my wits. This I mention as an instance of the great power of habitand prejudice.In a little time I and my family and friends came to a rightunderstanding but my wife protested I should never go to sea anymore although my evil destiny so ordered that she had not power tohinder me as the reader may know hereafter. In the mean time I hereconclude the second part of my unfortunate voyages.PART III. A VOYAGE TO LAPUTA BALNIBARBI GLUBBDUBDRIB LUGGNAGG ANDJAPAN.CHAPTER I.The author sets out on his third voyage. Is taken by pirates. Themalice of a Dutchman. His arrival at an island. He is received intoLaputa.I had not been at home above ten days when Captain William Robinson aCornish man commander of the Hopewell a stout ship of three hundredtons came to my house. I had formerly been surgeon of another shipwhere he was master and a fourth part owner in a voyage to theLevant. He had always treated me more like a brother than an inferiorofficer and hearing of my arrival made me a visit as I apprehendedonly out of friendship for nothing passed more than what is usualafter long absences. But repeating his visits often expressing his joyto find me in good health asking whether I were now settled forlife adding that he intended a voyage to the East Indies in twomonths at last he plainly invited me though with some apologies tobe surgeon of the ship that I should have another surgeon under mebeside our two mates that my salary should be double to the usual payand that having experienced my knowledge in seaaffairs to be at leastequal to his he would enter into any engagement to follow my adviceas much as if I had shared in the command.He said so many other obliging things and I knew him to be so honest aman that I could not reject this proposal the thirst I had of seeingthe world notwithstanding my past misfortunes continuing as violentas ever. The only difficulty that remained was to persuade my wifewhose consent however I at last obtained by the prospect of advantageshe proposed to her children.We set out the th day of August and arrived at Fort St. Georgethe th of April . We staid there three weeks to refresh ourcrew many of whom were sick. From thence we went to Tonquin where thecaptain resolved to continue some time because many of the goods heintended to buy were not ready nor could he expect to be dispatched inseveral months. Therefore in hopes to defray some of the charges hemust be at he bought a sloop loaded it with several sorts of goodswherewith the Tonquinese usually trade to the neighbouring islands andputting fourteen men on board whereof three were of the country heappointed me master of the sloop and gave me power to traffic whilehe transacted his affairs at Tonquin.We had not sailed above three days when a great storm arising we weredriven five days to the northnortheast and then to the east afterwhich we had fair weather but still with a pretty strong gale from thewest. Upon the tenth day we were chased by two pirates who soonovertook us for my sloop was so deep laden that she sailed very slowneither were we in a condition to defend ourselves.We were boarded about the same time by both the pirates who enteredfuriously at the head of their men but finding us all prostrate uponour faces for so I gave order they pinioned us with strong ropesand setting guard upon us went to search the sloop.I observed among them a Dutchman who seemed to be of some authoritythough he was not commander of either ship. He knew us by ourcountenances to be Englishmen and jabbering to us in his own languageswore we should be tied back to back and thrown into the sea. I spokeDutch tolerably well I told him who we were and begged him inconsideration of our being Christians and Protestants of neighbouringcountries in strict alliance that he would move the captains to takesome pity on us. This inflamed his rage he repeated his threateningsand turning to his companions spoke with great vehemence in theJapanese language as I suppose often using the word Christianos.The largest of the two pirate ships was commanded by a Japanesecaptain who spoke a little Dutch but very imperfectly. He came up tome and after several questions which I answered in great humility hesaid we should not die. I made the captain a very low bow and thenturning to the Dutchman said I was sorry to find more mercy in aheathen than in a brother christian. But I had soon reason to repentthose foolish words for that malicious reprobate having oftenendeavoured in vain to persuade both the captains that I might bethrown into the sea which they would not yield to after the promisemade me that I should not die however prevailed so far as to have apunishment inflicted on me worse in all human appearance than deathitself. My men were sent by an equal division into both the pirateships and my sloop new manned. As to myself it was determined that Ishould be set adrift in a small canoe with paddles and a sail andfour days provisions which last the Japanese captain was so kind todouble out of his own stores and would permit no man to search me. Igot down into the canoe while the Dutchman standing upon the deckloaded me with all the curses and injurious terms his language couldafford.About an hour before we saw the pirates I had taken an observation andfound we were in the latitude of N. and longitude of . When I wasat some distance from the pirates I discovered by my pocketglassseveral islands to the southeast. I set up my sail the wind beingfair with a design to reach the nearest of those islands which I madea shift to do in about three hours. It was all rocky however I gotmany birds eggs and striking fire I kindled some heath and dryseaweed by which I roasted my eggs. I ate no other supper beingresolved to spare my provisions as much as I could. I passed the nightunder the shelter of a rock strewing some heath under me and sleptpretty well.The next day I sailed to another island and thence to a third andfourth sometimes using my sail and sometimes my paddles. But not totrouble the reader with a particular account of my distresses let itsuffice that on the fifth day I arrived at the last island in mysight which lay southsoutheast to the former.This island was at a greater distance than I expected and I did notreach it in less than five hours. I encompassed it almost round beforeI could find a convenient place to land in which was a small creekabout three times the wideness of my canoe. I found the island to beall rocky only a little intermingled with tufts of grass andsweetsmelling herbs. I took out my small provisions and after havingrefreshed myself I secured the remainder in a cave whereof there weregreat numbers I gathered plenty of eggs upon the rocks and got aquantity of dry seaweed and parched grass which I designed to kindlethe next day and roast my eggs as well as I could for I had about memy flint steel match and burningglass. I lay all night in the cavewhere I had lodged my provisions. My bed was the same dry grass andseaweed which I intended for fuel. I slept very little for thedisquiets of my mind prevailed over my weariness and kept me awake. Iconsidered how impossible it was to preserve my life in so desolate aplace and how miserable my end must be yet found myself so listlessand desponding that I had not the heart to rise and before I couldget spirits enough to creep out of my cave the day was far advanced. Iwalked awhile among the rocks the sky was perfectly clear and the sunso hot that I was forced to turn my face from it when all on a suddenit became obscure as I thought in a manner very different from whathappens by the interposition of a cloud. I turned back and perceived avast opaque body between me and the sun moving forwards towards theisland it seemed to be about two miles high and hid the sun six orseven minutes but I did not observe the air to be much colder or thesky more darkened than if I had stood under the shade of a mountain.As it approached nearer over the place where I was it appeared to be afirm substance the bottom flat smooth and shining very bright fromthe reflection of the sea below. I stood upon a height about twohundred yards from the shore and saw this vast body descending almostto a parallel with me at less than an English mile distance. I tookout my pocket perspective and could plainly discover numbers of peoplemoving up and down the sides of it which appeared to be sloping butwhat those people were doing I was not able to distinguish.The natural love of life gave me some inward motion of joy and I wasready to entertain a hope that this adventure might some way or otherhelp to deliver me from the desolate place and condition I was in. Butat the same time the reader can hardly conceive my astonishment tobehold an island in the air inhabited by men who were able as itshould seem to raise or sink or put it into progressive motion asthey pleased. But not being at that time in a disposition tophilosophise upon this phenomenon I rather chose to observe whatcourse the island would take because it seemed for a while to standstill. Yet soon after it advanced nearer and I could see the sides ofit encompassed with several gradations of galleries and stairs atcertain intervals to descend from one to the other. In the lowestgallery I beheld some people fishing with long angling rods andothers looking on. I waved my cap for my hat was long since worn outand my handkerchief toward the island and upon its nearer approach Icalled and shouted with the utmost strength of my voice and thenlooking circumspectly I beheld a crowd gather to that side which wasmost in my view. I found by their pointing towards me and to eachother that they plainly discovered me although they made no return tomy shouting. But I could see four or five men running in great hasteup the stairs to the top of the island who then disappeared. Ihappened rightly to conjecture that these were sent for orders to someperson in authority upon this occasion.The number of people increased and in less than half an hour theisland was moved and raised in such a manner that the lowest galleryappeared in a parallel of less than a hundred yards distance from theheight where I stood. I then put myself in the most supplicatingposture and spoke in the humblest accent but received no answer.Those who stood nearest over against me seemed to be persons ofdistinction as I supposed by their habit. They conferred earnestlywith each other looking often upon me. At length one of them calledout in a clear polite smooth dialect not unlike in sound to theItalian and therefore I returned an answer in that language hoping atleast that the cadence might be more agreeable to his ears. Althoughneither of us understood the other yet my meaning was easily knownfor the people saw the distress I was in.They made signs for me to come down from the rock and go towards theshore which I accordingly did and the flying island being raised to aconvenient height the verge directly over me a chain was let downfrom the lowest gallery with a seat fastened to the bottom to which Ifixed myself and was drawn up by pulleys.CHAPTER II.The humours and dispositions of the Laputians described. An account oftheir learning. Of the king and his court. The authors receptionthere. The inhabitants subject to fear and disquietudes. An account ofthe women.At my alighting I was surrounded with a crowd of people but those whostood nearest seemed to be of better quality. They beheld me with allthe marks and circumstances of wonder neither indeed was I much intheir debt having never till then seen a race of mortals so singularin their shapes habits and countenances. Their heads were allreclined either to the right or the left one of their eyes turnedinward and the other directly up to the zenith. Their outward garmentswere adorned with the figures of suns moons and stars interwovenwith those of fiddles flutes harps trumpets guitars harpsichordsand many other instruments of music unknown to us in Europe. Iobserved here and there many in the habit of servants with a blownbladder fastened like a flail to the end of a stick which theycarried in their hands. In each bladder was a small quantity of driedpeas or little pebbles as I was afterwards informed. With thesebladders they now and then flapped the mouths and ears of those whostood near them of which practice I could not then conceive themeaning. It seems the minds of these people are so taken up withintense speculations that they neither can speak nor attend to thediscourses of others without being roused by some external tactionupon the organs of speech and hearing for which reason those personswho are able to afford it always keep a flapper the original isclimenole in their family as one of their domestics nor ever walkabroad or make visits without him. And the business of this officeris when two three or more persons are in company gently to strikewith his bladder the mouth of him who is to speak and the right ear ofhim or them to whom the speaker addresses himself. This flapper islikewise employed diligently to attend his master in his walks andupon occasion to give him a soft flap on his eyes because he is alwaysso wrapped up in cogitation that he is in manifest danger of fallingdown every precipice and bouncing his head against every post and inthe streets of justling others or being justled himself into thekennel.It was necessary to give the reader this information without which hewould be at the same loss with me to understand the proceedings ofthese people as they conducted me up the stairs to the top of theisland and from thence to the royal palace. While we were ascendingthey forgot several times what they were about and left me to myselftill their memories were again roused by their flappers for theyappeared altogether unmoved by the sight of my foreign habit andcountenance and by the shouts of the vulgar whose thoughts and mindswere more disengaged.At last we entered the palace and proceeded into the chamber ofpresence where I saw the king seated on his throne attended on eachside by persons of prime quality. Before the throne was a large tablefilled with globes and spheres and mathematical instruments of allkinds. His majesty took not the least notice of us although ourentrance was not without sufficient noise by the concourse of allpersons belonging to the court. But he was then deep in a problem andwe attended at least an hour before he could solve it. There stood byhim on each side a young page with flaps in their hands and whenthey saw he was at leisure one of them gently struck his mouth andthe other his right ear at which he startled like one awaked on thesudden and looking towards me and the company I was in recollectedthe occasion of our coming whereof he had been informed before. Hespoke some words whereupon immediately a young man with a flap came upto my side and flapped me gently on the right ear but I made signsas well as I could that I had no occasion for such an instrumentwhich as I afterwards found gave his majesty and the whole court avery mean opinion of my understanding. The king as far as I couldconjecture asked me several questions and I addressed myself to himin all the languages I had. When it was found I could neitherunderstand nor be understood I was conducted by his order to anapartment in his palace this prince being distinguished above all hispredecessors for his hospitality to strangers where two servants wereappointed to attend me. My dinner was brought and four persons ofquality whom I remembered to have seen very near the kings persondid me the honour to dine with me. We had two courses of three disheseach. In the first course there was a shoulder of mutton cut into anequilateral triangle a piece of beef into a rhomboides and a puddinginto a cycloid. The second course was two ducks trussed up in the formof fiddles sausages and puddings resembling flutes and hautboys and abreast of veal in the shape of a harp. The servants cut our bread intocones cylinders parallelograms and several other mathematicalfigures.While we were at dinner I made bold to ask the names of several thingsin their language and those noble persons by the assistance of theirflappers delighted to give me answers hoping to raise my admirationof their great abilities if I could be brought to converse with them. Iwas soon able to call for bread and drink or whatever else I wanted.After dinner my company withdrew and a person was sent to me by thekings order attended by a flapper. He brought with him pen ink andpaper and three or four books giving me to understand by signs thathe was sent to teach me the language. We sat together four hours inwhich time I wrote down a great number of words in columns with thetranslations over against them I likewise made a shift to learnseveral short sentences for my tutor would order one of my servants tofetch something to turn about to make a bow to sit or to stand orwalk and the like. Then I took down the sentence in writing. He showedme also in one of his books the figures of the sun moon and starsthe zodiac the tropics and polar circles together with thedenominations of many planes and solids. He gave me the names anddescriptions of all the musical instruments and the general terms ofart in playing on each of them. After he had left me I placed all mywords with their interpretations in alphabetical order. And thus ina few days by the help of a very faithful memory I got some insightinto their language. The word which I interpret the flying or floatingisland is in the original Laputa whereof I could never learn thetrue etymology. Lap in the old obsolete language signifies highand untuh a governor from which they say by corruption wasderived Laputa from Lapuntuh. But I do not approve of thisderivation which seems to be a little strained. I ventured to offer tothe learned among them a conjecture of my own that Laputa was quasilap outed lap signifying properly the dancing of the sunbeams inthe sea and outed a wing which however I shall not obtrude butsubmit to the judicious reader.Those to whom the king had entrusted me observing how ill I was cladordered a tailor to come next morning and take measure for a suit ofclothes. This operator did his office after a different manner fromthose of his trade in Europe. He first took my altitude by a quadrantand then with a rule and compasses described the dimensions andoutlines of my whole body all which he entered upon paper and in sixdays brought my clothes very ill made and quite out of shape byhappening to mistake a figure in the calculation. But my comfort wasthat I observed such accidents very frequent and little regarded.During my confinement for want of clothes and by an indisposition thatheld me some days longer I much enlarged my dictionary and when Iwent next to court was able to understand many things the king spokeand to return him some kind of answers. His majesty had given ordersthat the island should move northeast and by east to the verticalpoint over Lagado the metropolis of the whole kingdom below upon thefirm earth. It was about ninety leagues distant and our voyage lastedfour days and a half. I was not in the least sensible of theprogressive motion made in the air by the island. On the secondmorning about eleven oclock the king himself in person attended byhis nobility courtiers and officers having prepared all theirmusical instruments played on them for three hours withoutintermission so that I was quite stunned with the noise neither couldI possibly guess the meaning till my tutor informed me. He said thatthe people of their island had their ears adapted to hear the music ofthe spheres which always played at certain periods and the court wasnow prepared to bear their part in whatever instrument they mostexcelled.In our journey towards Lagado the capital city his majesty orderedthat the island should stop over certain towns and villages fromwhence he might receive the petitions of his subjects. And to thispurpose several packthreads were let down with small weights at thebottom. On these packthreads the people strung their petitions whichmounted up directly like the scraps of paper fastened by schoolboys atthe end of the string that holds their kite. Sometimes we received wineand victuals from below which were drawn up by pulleys.The knowledge I had in mathematics gave me great assistance inacquiring their phraseology which depended much upon that science andmusic and in the latter I was not unskilled. Their ideas areperpetually conversant in lines and figures. If they would forexample praise the beauty of a woman or any other animal theydescribe it by rhombs circles parallelograms ellipses and othergeometrical terms or by words of art drawn from music needless hereto repeat. I observed in the kings kitchen all sorts of mathematicaland musical instruments after the figures of which they cut up thejoints that were served to his majestys table.Their houses are very ill built the walls bevel without one rightangle in any apartment and this defect arises from the contempt theybear to practical geometry which they despise as vulgar and mechanicthose instructions they give being too refined for the intellects oftheir workmen which occasions perpetual mistakes. And although theyare dexterous enough upon a piece of paper in the management of therule the pencil and the divider yet in the common actions andbehaviour of life I have not seen a more clumsy awkward and unhandypeople nor so slow and perplexed in their conceptions upon all othersubjects except those of mathematics and music. They are very badreasoners and vehemently given to opposition unless when they happento be of the right opinion which is seldom their case. Imaginationfancy and invention they are wholly strangers to nor have any wordsin their language by which those ideas can be expressed the wholecompass of their thoughts and mind being shut up within the twoforementioned sciences.Most of them and especially those who deal in the astronomical parthave great faith in judicial astrology although they are ashamed toown it publicly. But what I chiefly admired and thought altogetherunaccountable was the strong disposition I observed in them towardsnews and politics perpetually inquiring into public affairs givingtheir judgments in matters of state and passionately disputing everyinch of a party opinion. I have indeed observed the same dispositionamong most of the mathematicians I have known in Europe although Icould never discover the least analogy between the two sciences unlessthose people suppose that because the smallest circle has as manydegrees as the largest therefore the regulation and management of theworld require no more abilities than the handling and turning of aglobe but I rather take this quality to spring from a very commoninfirmity of human nature inclining us to be most curious andconceited in matters where we have least concern and for which we areleast adapted by study or nature.These people are under continual disquietudes never enjoying aminutes peace of mind and their disturbances proceed from causeswhich very little affect the rest of mortals. Their apprehensions arisefrom several changes they dread in the celestial bodies for instancethat the earth by the continual approaches of the sun towards itmust in course of time be absorbed or swallowed up that the face ofthe sun will by degrees be encrusted with its own effluvia and giveno more light to the world that the earth very narrowly escaped abrush from the tail of the last comet which would have infalliblyreduced it to ashes and that the next which they have calculated foroneandthirty years hence will probably destroy us. For if in itsperihelion it should approach within a certain degree of the sun asby their calculations they have reason to dread it will receive adegree of heat ten thousand times more intense than that of red hotglowing iron and in its absence from the sun carry a blazing tail tenhundred thousand and fourteen miles long through which if the earthshould pass at the distance of one hundred thousand miles from thenucleus or main body of the comet it must in its passage be set onfire and reduced to ashes that the sun daily spending its rayswithout any nutriment to supply them will at last be wholly consumedand annihilated which must be attended with the destruction of thisearth and of all the planets that receive their light from it.They are so perpetually alarmed with the apprehensions of these andthe like impending dangers that they can neither sleep quietly intheir beds nor have any relish for the common pleasures and amusementsof life. When they meet an acquaintance in the morning the firstquestion is about the suns health how he looked at his setting andrising and what hopes they have to avoid the stroke of the approachingcomet. This conversation they are apt to run into with the same temperthat boys discover in delighting to hear terrible stories of spiritsand hobgoblins which they greedily listen to and dare not go to bedfor fear.The women of the island have abundance of vivacity they contemn theirhusbands and are exceedingly fond of strangers whereof there isalways a considerable number from the continent below attending atcourt either upon affairs of the several towns and corporations ortheir own particular occasions but are much despised because theywant the same endowments. Among these the ladies choose their gallantsbut the vexation is that they act with too much ease and security forthe husband is always so rapt in speculation that the mistress andlover may proceed to the greatest familiarities before his face if hebe but provided with paper and implements and without his flapper athis side.The wives and daughters lament their confinement to the islandalthough I think it the most delicious spot of ground in the world andalthough they live here in the greatest plenty and magnificence andare allowed to do whatever they please they long to see the world andtake the diversions of the metropolis which they are not allowed to dowithout a particular license from the king and this is not easy to beobtained because the people of quality have found by frequentexperience how hard it is to persuade their women to return frombelow. I was told that a great court lady who had several childrenismarried to the prime minister the richest subject in the kingdom avery graceful person extremely fond of her and lives in the finestpalace of the islandwent down to Lagado on the pretence of healththere hid herself for several months till the king sent a warrant tosearch for her and she was found in an obscure eatinghouse all inrags having pawned her clothes to maintain an old deformed footmanwho beat her every day and in whose company she was taken muchagainst her will. And although her husband received her with allpossible kindness and without the least reproach she soon aftercontrived to steal down again with all her jewels to the samegallant and has not been heard of since.This may perhaps pass with the reader rather for an European or Englishstory than for one of a country so remote. But he may please toconsider that the caprices of womankind are not limited by any climateor nation and that they are much more uniform than can be easilyimagined.In about a months time I had made a tolerable proficiency in theirlanguage and was able to answer most of the kings questions when Ihad the honour to attend him. His majesty discovered not the leastcuriosity to inquire into the laws government history religion ormanners of the countries where I had been but confined his questionsto the state of mathematics and received the account I gave him withgreat contempt and indifference though often roused by his flapper oneach side.CHAPTER III.A phenomenon solved by modern philosophy and astronomy. The Laputiansgreat improvements in the latter. The kings method of suppressinginsurrections.I desired leave of this prince to see the curiosities of the islandwhich he was graciously pleased to grant and ordered my tutor toattend me. I chiefly wanted to know to what cause in art or innature it owed its several motions whereof I will now give aphilosophical account to the reader.The flying or floating island is exactly circular its diameter yards or about four miles and a half and consequently contains tenthousand acres. It is three hundred yards thick. The bottom or undersurface which appears to those who view it below is one even regularplate of adamant shooting up to the height of about two hundred yards.Above it lie the several minerals in their usual order and over all isa coat of rich mould ten or twelve feet deep. The declivity of theupper surface from the circumference to the centre is the naturalcause why all the dews and rains which fall upon the island areconveyed in small rivulets toward the middle where they are emptiedinto four large basins each of about half a mile in circuit and twohundred yards distant from the centre. From these basins the water iscontinually exhaled by the sun in the daytime which effectuallyprevents their overflowing. Besides as it is in the power of themonarch to raise the island above the region of clouds and vapours hecan prevent the falling of dews and rain whenever he pleases. For thehighest clouds cannot rise above two miles as naturalists agree atleast they were never known to do so in that country.At the centre of the island there is a chasm about fifty yards indiameter whence the astronomers descend into a large dome which istherefore called flandona gagnole or the astronomers cave situatedat the depth of a hundred yards beneath the upper surface of theadamant. In this cave are twenty lamps continually burning which fromthe reflection of the adamant cast a strong light into every part. Theplace is stored with great variety of sextants quadrants telescopesastrolabes and other astronomical instruments. But the greatestcuriosity upon which the fate of the island depends is a loadstone ofa prodigious size in shape resembling a weavers shuttle. It is inlength six yards and in the thickest part at least three yards over.This magnet is sustained by a very strong axle of adamant passingthrough its middle upon which it plays and is poised so exactly thatthe weakest hand can turn it. It is hooped round with a hollow cylinderof adamant four feet deep as many thick and twelve yards indiameter placed horizontally and supported by eight adamantine feeteach six yards high. In the middle of the concave side there is agroove twelve inches deep in which the extremities of the axle arelodged and turned round as there is occasion.The stone cannot be removed from its place by any force because thehoop and its feet are one continued piece with that body of adamantwhich constitutes the bottom of the island.By means of this loadstone the island is made to rise and fall andmove from one place to another. For with respect to that part of theearth over which the monarch presides the stone is endued at one ofits sides with an attractive power and at the other with a repulsive.Upon placing the magnet erect with its attracting end towards theearth the island descends but when the repelling extremity pointsdownwards the island mounts directly upwards. When the position of thestone is oblique the motion of the island is so too. For in thismagnet the forces always act in lines parallel to its direction.By this oblique motion the island is conveyed to different parts ofthe monarchs dominions. To explain the manner of its progress let AB represent a line drawn across the dominions of Balnibarbi let theline c d represent the loadstone of which let d be the repellingend and c the attracting end the island being over C let thestone be placed in the position c d with its repelling enddownwards then the island will be driven upwards obliquely towardsD. When it is arrived at D let the stone be turned upon its axletill its attracting end points towards E and then the island will becarried obliquely towards E where if the stone be again turned uponits axle till it stands in the position E F with its repellingpoint downwards the island will rise obliquely towards F where bydirecting the attracting end towards G the island may be carried toG and from G to H by turning the stone so as to make itsrepelling extremity to point directly downward. And thus by changingthe situation of the stone as often as there is occasion the islandis made to rise and fall by turns in an oblique direction and by thosealternate risings and fallings the obliquity being not considerableis conveyed from one part of the dominions to the other.But it must be observed that this island cannot move beyond the extentof the dominions below nor can it rise above the height of four miles.For which the astronomers who have written large systems concerningthe stone assign the following reason that the magnetic virtue doesnot extend beyond the distance of four miles and that the mineralwhich acts upon the stone in the bowels of the earth and in the seaabout six leagues distant from the shore is not diffused through thewhole globe but terminated with the limits of the kings dominionsand it was easy from the great advantage of such a superior situationfor a prince to bring under his obedience whatever country lay withinthe attraction of that magnet.When the stone is put parallel to the plane of the horizon the islandstands still for in that case the extremities of it being at equaldistance from the earth act with equal force the one in drawingdownwards the other in pushing upwards and consequently no motion canensue.This loadstone is under the care of certain astronomers who from timeto time give it such positions as the monarch directs. They spend thegreatest part of their lives in observing the celestial bodies whichthey do by the assistance of glasses far excelling ours in goodness.For although their largest telescopes do not exceed three feet theymagnify much more than those of a hundred with us and show the starswith greater clearness. This advantage has enabled them to extend theirdiscoveries much further than our astronomers in Europe for they havemade a catalogue of ten thousand fixed stars whereas the largest ofours do not contain above one third part of that number. They havelikewise discovered two lesser stars or satellites which revolveabout Mars whereof the innermost is distant from the centre of theprimary planet exactly three of his diameters and the outermost fivethe former revolves in the space of ten hours and the latter intwentyone and a half so that the squares of their periodical timesare very near in the same proportion with the cubes of their distancefrom the centre of Mars which evidently shows them to be governed bythe same law of gravitation that influences the other heavenly bodies.They have observed ninetythree different comets and settled theirperiods with great exactness. If this be true and they affirm it withgreat confidence it is much to be wished that their observations weremade public whereby the theory of comets which at present is verylame and defective might be brought to the same perfection with otherarts of astronomy.The king would be the most absolute prince in the universe if he couldbut prevail on a ministry to join with him but these having theirestates below on the continent and considering that the office of afavourite has a very uncertain tenure would never consent to theenslaving of their country.If any town should engage in rebellion or mutiny fall into violentfactions or refuse to pay the usual tribute the king has two methodsof reducing them to obedience. The first and the mildest course is bykeeping the island hovering over such a town and the lands about itwhereby he can deprive them of the benefit of the sun and the rain andconsequently afflict the inhabitants with dearth and diseases. And ifthe crime deserve it they are at the same time pelted from above withgreat stones against which they have no defence but by creeping intocellars or caves while the roofs of their houses are beaten to pieces.But if they still continue obstinate or offer to raise insurrectionshe proceeds to the last remedy by letting the island drop directlyupon their heads which makes a universal destruction both of housesand men. However this is an extremity to which the prince is seldomdriven neither indeed is he willing to put it in execution nor darehis ministers advise him to an action which as it would render themodious to the people so it would be a great damage to their ownestates which all lie below for the island is the kings demesne.But there is still indeed a more weighty reason why the kings of thiscountry have been always averse from executing so terrible an actionunless upon the utmost necessity. For if the town intended to bedestroyed should have in it any tall rocks as it generally falls outin the larger cities a situation probably chosen at first with a viewto prevent such a catastrophe or if it abound in high spires orpillars of stone a sudden fall might endanger the bottom or undersurface of the island which although it consist as I have said ofone entire adamant two hundred yards thick might happen to crack bytoo great a shock or burst by approaching too near the fires from thehouses below as the backs both of iron and stone will often do inour chimneys. Of all this the people are well apprised and understandhow far to carry their obstinacy where their liberty or property isconcerned. And the king when he is highest provoked and mostdetermined to press a city to rubbish orders the island to descendwith great gentleness out of a pretence of tenderness to his peoplebut indeed for fear of breaking the adamantine bottom in which caseit is the opinion of all their philosophers that the loadstone couldno longer hold it up and the whole mass would fall to the ground.About three years before my arrival among them while the king was inhis progress over his dominions there happened an extraordinaryaccident which had like to have put a period to the fate of thatmonarchy at least as it is now instituted. Lindalino the second cityin the kingdom was the first his majesty visited in his progress.Three days after his departure the inhabitants who had oftencomplained of great oppressions shut the town gates seized on thegovernor and with incredible speed and labour erected four largetowers one at every corner of the city which is an exact squareequal in height to a strong pointed rock that stands directly in thecentre of the city. Upon the top of each tower as well as upon therock they fixed a great loadstone and in case their design shouldfail they had provided a vast quantity of the most combustible fuelhoping to burst therewith the adamantine bottom of the island if theloadstone project should miscarry.It was eight months before the king had perfect notice that theLindalinians were in rebellion. He then commanded that the islandshould be wafted over the city. The people were unanimous and had laidin store of provisions and a great river runs through the middle ofthe town. The king hovered over them several days to deprive them ofthe sun and the rain. He ordered many packthreads to be let down yetnot a person offered to send up a petition but instead thereof verybold demands the redress of all their grievances great immunitiesthe choice of their own governor and other the like exorbitances. Uponwhich his majesty commanded all the inhabitants of the island to castgreat stones from the lower gallery into the town but the citizens hadprovided against this mischief by conveying their persons and effectsinto the four towers and other strong buildings and vaultsunderground.The king being now determined to reduce this proud people ordered thatthe island should descend gently within forty yards of the top of thetowers and rock. This was accordingly done but the officers employedin that work found the descent much speedier than usual and by turningthe loadstone could not without great difficulty keep it in a firmposition but found the island inclining to fall. They sent the kingimmediate intelligence of this astonishing event and begged hismajestys permission to raise the island higher the king consented ageneral council was called and the officers of the loadstone orderedto attend. One of the oldest and expertest among them obtained leave totry an experiment he took a strong line of an hundred yards and theisland being raised over the town above the attracting power they hadfelt he fastened a piece of adamant to the end of his line which hadin it a mixture of iron mineral of the same nature with that whereofthe bottom or lower surface of the island is composed and from thelower gallery let it down slowly towards the top of the towers. Theadamant was not descended four yards before the officer felt it drawnso strongly downwards that he could hardly pull it back he then threwdown several small pieces of adamant and observed that they were allviolently attracted by the top of the tower. The same experiment wasmade on the other three towers and on the rock with the same effect.This incident broke entirely the kings measures and to dwell nolonger on other circumstances he was forced to give the town their ownconditions.I was assured by a great minister that if the island had descended sonear the town as not to be able to raise itself the citizens weredetermined to fix it for ever to kill the king and all his servantsand entirely change the government.By a fundamental law of this realm neither the king nor either of histwo eldest sons are permitted to leave the island nor the queen tillshe is past childbearing.CHAPTER IV.The author leaves Laputa is conveyed to Balnibarbi arrives at themetropolis. A description of the metropolis and the country adjoining.The author hospitably received by a great lord. His conversation withthat lord.Although I cannot say that I was ill treated in this island yet I mustconfess I thought myself too much neglected not without some degree ofcontempt for neither prince nor people appeared to be curious in anypart of knowledge except mathematics and music wherein I was fartheir inferior and upon that account very little regarded.On the other side after having seen all the curiosities of the islandI was very desirous to leave it being heartily weary of those people.They were indeed excellent in two sciences for which I have greatesteem and wherein I am not unversed but at the same time soabstracted and involved in speculation that I never met with suchdisagreeable companions. I conversed only with women tradesmenflappers and courtpages during two months of my abode there bywhich at last I rendered myself extremely contemptible yet thesewere the only people from whom I could ever receive a reasonableanswer.I had obtained by hard study a good degree of knowledge in theirlanguage I was weary of being confined to an island where I receivedso little countenance and resolved to leave it with the firstopportunity.There was a great lord at court nearly related to the king and forthat reason alone used with respect. He was universally reckoned themost ignorant and stupid person among them. He had performed manyeminent services for the crown had great natural and acquired partsadorned with integrity and honour but so ill an ear for music thathis detractors reported he had been often known to beat time in thewrong place neither could his tutors without extreme difficultyteach him to demonstrate the most easy proposition in the mathematics.He was pleased to show me many marks of favour often did me the honourof a visit desired to be informed in the affairs of Europe the lawsand customs the manners and learning of the several countries where Ihad travelled. He listened to me with great attention and made verywise observations on all I spoke. He had two flappers attending him forstate but never made use of them except at court and in visits ofceremony and would always command them to withdraw when we were alonetogether.I entreated this illustrious person to intercede in my behalf with hismajesty for leave to depart which he accordingly did as he waspleased to tell me with regret for indeed he had made me severaloffers very advantageous which however I refused with expressionsof the highest acknowledgment.On the th day of February I took leave of his majesty and the court.The king made me a present to the value of about two hundred poundsEnglish and my protector his kinsman as much more together with aletter of recommendation to a friend of his in Lagado the metropolis.The island being then hovering over a mountain about two miles from itI was let down from the lowest gallery in the same manner as I hadbeen taken up.The continent as far as it is subject to the monarch of the flyingisland passes under the general name of Balnibarbi and themetropolis as I said before is called Lagado. I felt some littlesatisfaction in finding myself on firm ground. I walked to the citywithout any concern being clad like one of the natives andsufficiently instructed to converse with them. I soon found out thepersons house to whom I was recommended presented my letter from hisfriend the grandee in the island and was received with much kindness.This great lord whose name was Munodi ordered me an apartment in hisown house where I continued during my stay and was entertained in amost hospitable manner.The next morning after my arrival he took me in his chariot to see thetown which is about half the bigness of London but the houses verystrangely built and most of them out of repair. The people in thestreets walked fast looked wild their eyes fixed and were generallyin rags. We passed through one of the town gates and went about threemiles into the country where I saw many labourers working with severalsorts of tools in the ground but was not able to conjecture what theywere about neither did I observe any expectation either of corn orgrass although the soil appeared to be excellent. I could not forbearadmiring at these odd appearances both in town and country and I madebold to desire my conductor that he would be pleased to explain to mewhat could be meant by so many busy heads hands and faces both inthe streets and the fields because I did not discover any good effectsthey produced but on the contrary I never knew a soil so unhappilycultivated houses so ill contrived and so ruinous or a people whosecountenances and habit expressed so much misery and want.This lord Munodi was a person of the first rank and had been someyears governor of Lagado but by a cabal of ministers was dischargedfor insufficiency. However the king treated him with tenderness as awellmeaning man but of a low contemptible understanding.When I gave that free censure of the country and its inhabitants hemade no further answer than by telling me that I had not been longenough among them to form a judgment and that the different nations ofthe world had different customs with other common topics to the samepurpose. But when we returned to his palace he asked me how I likedthe building what absurdities I observed and what quarrel I had withthe dress or looks of his domestics This he might safely do becauseevery thing about him was magnificent regular and polite. I answeredthat his excellencys prudence quality and fortune had exempted himfrom those defects which folly and beggary had produced in others. Hesaid if I would go with him to his countryhouse about twenty milesdistant where his estate lay there would be more leisure for thiskind of conversation. I told his excellency that I was entirely athis disposal and accordingly we set out next morning.During our journey he made me observe the several methods used byfarmers in managing their lands which to me were wholly unaccountablefor except in some very few places I could not discover one ear ofcorn or blade of grass. But in three hours travelling the scene waswholly altered we came into a most beautiful country farmers housesat small distances neatly built the fields enclosed containingvineyards corngrounds and meadows. Neither do I remember to haveseen a more delightful prospect. His excellency observed my countenanceto clear up he told me with a sigh that there his estate began andwould continue the same till we should come to his house that hiscountrymen ridiculed and despised him for managing his affairs nobetter and for setting so ill an example to the kingdom whichhowever was followed by very few such as were old and wilful andweak like himself.We came at length to the house which was indeed a noble structurebuilt according to the best rules of ancient architecture. Thefountains gardens walks avenues and groves were all disposed withexact judgment and taste. I gave due praises to every thing I sawwhereof his excellency took not the least notice till after supperwhen there being no third companion he told me with a very melancholyair that he doubted he must throw down his houses in town and countryto rebuild them after the present mode destroy all his plantationsand cast others into such a form as modern usage required and give thesame directions to all his tenants unless he would submit to incur thecensure of pride singularity affectation ignorance caprice andperhaps increase his majestys displeasure that the admiration Iappeared to be under would cease or diminish when he had informed meof some particulars which probably I never heard of at court thepeople there being too much taken up in their own speculations to haveregard to what passed here below.The sum of his discourse was to this effect That about forty yearsago certain persons went up to Laputa either upon business ordiversion and after five months continuance came back with a verylittle smattering in mathematics but full of volatile spirits acquiredin that airy region that these persons upon their return began todislike the management of every thing below and fell into schemes ofputting all arts sciences languages and mechanics upon a new foot.To this end they procured a royal patent for erecting an academy ofprojectors in Lagado and the humour prevailed so strongly among thepeople that there is not a town of any consequence in the kingdomwithout such an academy. In these colleges the professors contrive newrules and methods of agriculture and building and new instruments andtools for all trades and manufactures whereby as they undertake oneman shall do the work of ten a palace may be built in a week ofmaterials so durable as to last for ever without repairing. All thefruits of the earth shall come to maturity at whatever season we thinkfit to choose and increase a hundred fold more than they do atpresent with innumerable other happy proposals. The only inconvenienceis that none of these projects are yet brought to perfection and inthe mean time the whole country lies miserably waste the houses inruins and the people without food or clothes. By all which instead ofbeing discouraged they are fifty times more violently bent uponprosecuting their schemes driven equally on by hope and despair thatas for himself being not of an enterprising spirit he was content togo on in the old forms to live in the houses his ancestors had builtand act as they did in every part of life without innovation thatsome few other persons of quality and gentry had done the same butwere looked on with an eye of contempt and illwill as enemies to artignorant and ill commonwealths men preferring their own ease andsloth before the general improvement of their country.His lordship added That he would not by any further particularsprevent the pleasure I should certainly take in viewing the grandacademy whither he was resolved I should go. He only desired me toobserve a ruined building upon the side of a mountain about threemiles distant of which he gave me this account That he had a veryconvenient mill within half a mile of his house turned by a currentfrom a large river and sufficient for his own family as well as agreat number of his tenants that about seven years ago a club ofthose projectors came to him with proposals to destroy this mill andbuild another on the side of that mountain on the long ridge whereof along canal must be cut for a repository of water to be conveyed up bypipes and engines to supply the mill because the wind and air upon aheight agitated the water and thereby made it fitter for motion andbecause the water descending down a declivity would turn the millwith half the current of a river whose course is more upon a level. Hesaid that being then not very well with the court and pressed bymany of his friends he complied with the proposal and after employinga hundred men for two years the work miscarried the projectors wentoff laying the blame entirely upon him railing at him ever since andputting others upon the same experiment with equal assurance ofsuccess as well as equal disappointment.In a few days we came back to town and his excellency considering thebad character he had in the academy would not go with me himself butrecommended me to a friend of his to bear me company thither. My lordwas pleased to represent me as a great admirer of projects and aperson of much curiosity and easy belief which indeed was notwithout truth for I had myself been a sort of projector in my youngerdays.CHAPTER V.The author permitted to see the grand academy of Lagado. The academylargely described. The arts wherein the professors employ themselves.This academy is not an entire single building but a continuation ofseveral houses on both sides of a street which growing waste waspurchased and applied to that use.I was received very kindly by the warden and went for many days to theacademy. Every room has in it one or more projectors and I believe Icould not be in fewer than five hundred rooms.The first man I saw was of a meagre aspect with sooty hands and facehis hair and beard long ragged and singed in several places. Hisclothes shirt and skin were all of the same colour. He had beeneight years upon a project for extracting sunbeams out of cucumberswhich were to be put in phials hermetically sealed and let out to warmthe air in raw inclement summers. He told me he did not doubt thatin eight years more he should be able to supply the governors gardenswith sunshine at a reasonable rate but he complained that his stockwas low and entreated me to give him something as an encouragement toingenuity especially since this had been a very dear season forcucumbers. I made him a small present for my lord had furnished mewith money on purpose because he knew their practice of begging fromall who go to see them.I went into another chamber but was ready to hasten back being almostovercome with a horrible stink. My conductor pressed me forwardconjuring me in a whisper to give no offence which would be highlyresented and therefore I durst not so much as stop my nose. Theprojector of this cell was the most ancient student of the academy hisface and beard were of a pale yellow his hands and clothes daubed overwith filth. When I was presented to him he gave me a close embrace acompliment I could well have excused. His employment from his firstcoming into the academy was an operation to reduce human excrement toits original food by separating the several parts removing thetincture which it receives from the gall making the odour exhale andscumming off the saliva. He had a weekly allowance from the societyof a vessel filled with human ordure about the bigness of a Bristolbarrel.I saw another at work to calcine ice into gunpowder who likewiseshowed me a treatise he had written concerning the malleability offire which he intended to publish.There was a most ingenious architect who had contrived a new methodfor building houses by beginning at the roof and working downward tothe foundation which he justified to me by the like practice of thosetwo prudent insects the bee and the spider.There was a man born blind who had several apprentices in his owncondition their employment was to mix colours for painters whichtheir master taught them to distinguish by feeling and smelling. It wasindeed my misfortune to find them at that time not very perfect intheir lessons and the professor himself happened to be generallymistaken. This artist is much encouraged and esteemed by the wholefraternity.In another apartment I was highly pleased with a projector who hadfound a device of ploughing the ground with hogs to save the chargesof ploughs cattle and labour. The method is this in an acre ofground you bury at six inches distance and eight deep a quantity ofacorns dates chestnuts and other mast or vegetables whereof theseanimals are fondest then you drive six hundred or more of them intothe field where in a few days they will root up the whole ground insearch of their food and make it fit for sowing at the same timemanuring it with their dung it is true upon experiment they foundthe charge and trouble very great and they had little or no crop.However it is not doubted that this invention may be capable of greatimprovement.I went into another room where the walls and ceiling were all hunground with cobwebs except a narrow passage for the artist to go in andout. At my entrance he called aloud to me not to disturb his webs.He lamented the fatal mistake the world had been so long in of usingsilkworms while we had such plenty of domestic insects who infinitelyexcelled the former because they understood how to weave as well asspin. And he proposed further that by employing spiders the chargeof dyeing silks should be wholly saved whereof I was fully convincedwhen he showed me a vast number of flies most beautifully colouredwherewith he fed his spiders assuring us that the webs would take atincture from them and as he had them of all hues he hoped to fiteverybodys fancy as soon as he could find proper food for the fliesof certain gums oils and other glutinous matter to give a strengthand consistence to the threads.There was an astronomer who had undertaken to place a sundial uponthe great weathercock on the townhouse by adjusting the annual anddiurnal motions of the earth and sun so as to answer and coincide withall accidental turnings of the wind.I was complaining of a small fit of the colic upon which my conductorled me into a room where a great physician resided who was famous forcuring that disease by contrary operations from the same instrument.He had a large pair of bellows with a long slender muzzle of ivory.This he conveyed eight inches up the anus and drawing in the wind heaffirmed he could make the guts as lank as a dried bladder. But whenthe disease was more stubborn and violent he let in the muzzle whilethe bellows were full of wind which he discharged into the body of thepatient then withdrew the instrument to replenish it clapping histhumb strongly against the orifice of the fundament and this beingrepeated three or four times the adventitious wind would rush outbringing the noxious along with it like water put into a pump andthe patient recovered. I saw him try both experiments upon a dog butcould not discern any effect from the former. After the latter theanimal was ready to burst and made so violent a discharge as was veryoffensive to me and my companions. The dog died on the spot and weleft the doctor endeavouring to recover him by the same operation.I visited many other apartments but shall not trouble my reader withall the curiosities I observed being studious of brevity.I had hitherto seen only one side of the academy the other beingappropriated to the advancers of speculative learning of whom I shallsay something when I have mentioned one illustrious person more whois called among them the universal artist. He told us he had beenthirty years employing his thoughts for the improvement of human life.He had two large rooms full of wonderful curiosities and fifty men atwork. Some were condensing air into a dry tangible substance byextracting the nitre and letting the aqueous or fluid particlespercolate others softening marble for pillows and pincushionsothers petrifying the hoofs of a living horse to preserve them fromfoundering. The artist himself was at that time busy upon two greatdesigns the first to sow land with chaff wherein he affirmed thetrue seminal virtue to be contained as he demonstrated by severalexperiments which I was not skilful enough to comprehend. The otherwas by a certain composition of gums minerals and vegetablesoutwardly applied to prevent the growth of wool upon two young lambsand he hoped in a reasonable time to propagate the breed of nakedsheep all over the kingdom.We crossed a walk to the other part of the academy where as I havealready said the projectors in speculative learning resided.The first professor I saw was in a very large room with forty pupilsabout him. After salutation observing me to look earnestly upon aframe which took up the greatest part of both the length and breadthof the room he said Perhaps I might wonder to see him employed in aproject for improving speculative knowledge by practical andmechanical operations. But the world would soon be sensible of itsusefulness and he flattered himself that a more noble exaltedthought never sprang in any other mans head. Every one knew howlaborious the usual method is of attaining to arts and scienceswhereas by his contrivance the most ignorant person at a reasonablecharge and with a little bodily labour might write books inphilosophy poetry politics laws mathematics and theology withoutthe least assistance from genius or study. He then led me to theframe about the sides whereof all his pupils stood in ranks. It wastwenty feet square placed in the middle of the room. The superficieswas composed of several bits of wood about the bigness of a die butsome larger than others. They were all linked together by slenderwires. These bits of wood were covered on every square with paperpasted on them and on these papers were written all the words of theirlanguage in their several moods tenses and declensions but withoutany order. The professor then desired me to observe for he was goingto set his engine at work. The pupils at his command took each ofthem hold of an iron handle whereof there were forty fixed round theedges of the frame and giving them a sudden turn the wholedisposition of the words was entirely changed. He then commandedsixandthirty of the lads to read the several lines softly as theyappeared upon the frame and where they found three or four wordstogether that might make part of a sentence they dictated to the fourremaining boys who were scribes. This work was repeated three or fourtimes and at every turn the engine was so contrived that the wordsshifted into new places as the square bits of wood moved upside down.The frameSix hours a day the young students were employed in this labour andthe professor showed me several volumes in large folio alreadycollected of broken sentences which he intended to piece togetherand out of those rich materials to give the world a complete body ofall arts and sciences which however might be still improved andmuch expedited if the public would raise a fund for making andemploying five hundred such frames in Lagado and oblige the managersto contribute in common their several collections.He assured me that this invention had employed all his thoughts fromhis youth that he had emptied the whole vocabulary into his frame andmade the strictest computation of the general proportion there is inbooks between the numbers of particles nouns and verbs and otherparts of speech.I made my humblest acknowledgment to this illustrious person for hisgreat communicativeness and promised if ever I had the good fortuneto return to my native country that I would do him justice as thesole inventor of this wonderful machine the form and contrivance ofwhich I desired leave to delineate on paper as in the figure hereannexed. I told him although it were the custom of our learned inEurope to steal inventions from each other who had thereby at leastthis advantage that it became a controversy which was the right owneryet I would take such caution that he should have the honour entirewithout a rival.We next went to the school of languages where three professors sat inconsultation upon improving that of their own country.The first project was to shorten discourse by cutting polysyllablesinto one and leaving out verbs and participles because in realityall things imaginable are but nouns.The other project was a scheme for entirely abolishing all wordswhatsoever and this was urged as a great advantage in point of healthas well as brevity. For it is plain that every word we speak is insome degree a diminution of our lungs by corrosion and consequentlycontributes to the shortening of our lives. An expedient was thereforeoffered that since words are only names for things it would bemore convenient for all men to carry about them such things as werenecessary to express a particular business they are to discourse on.And this invention would certainly have taken place to the great easeas well as health of the subject if the women in conjunction with thevulgar and illiterate had not threatened to raise a rebellion unlessthey might be allowed the liberty to speak with their tongues afterthe manner of their forefathers such constant irreconcilable enemiesto science are the common people. However many of the most learned andwise adhere to the new scheme of expressing themselves by things whichhas only this inconvenience attending it that if a mans business bevery great and of various kinds he must be obliged in proportion tocarry a greater bundle of things upon his back unless he can affordone or two strong servants to attend him. I have often beheld two ofthose sages almost sinking under the weight of their packs likepedlars among us who when they met in the street would lay downtheir loads open their sacks and hold conversation for an hourtogether then put up their implements help each other to resume theirburdens and take their leave.But for short conversations a man may carry implements in his pocketsand under his arms enough to supply him and in his house he cannotbe at a loss. Therefore the room where company meet who practise thisart is full of all things ready at hand requisite to furnish matterfor this kind of artificial converse.Another great advantage proposed by this invention was that it wouldserve as a universal language to be understood in all civilisednations whose goods and utensils are generally of the same kind ornearly resembling so that their uses might easily be comprehended. Andthus ambassadors would be qualified to treat with foreign princes orministers of state to whose tongues they were utter strangers.I was at the mathematical school where the master taught his pupilsafter a method scarce imaginable to us in Europe. The proposition anddemonstration were fairly written on a thin wafer with ink composedof a cephalic tincture. This the student was to swallow upon a fastingstomach and for three days following eat nothing but bread and water.As the wafer digested the tincture mounted to his brain bearing theproposition along with it. But the success has not hitherto beenanswerable partly by some error in the quantum or composition andpartly by the perverseness of lads to whom this bolus is so nauseousthat they generally steal aside and discharge it upwards before itcan operate neither have they been yet persuaded to use so long anabstinence as the prescription requires.CHAPTER VI.A further account of the academy. The author proposes someimprovements which are honourably received.In the school of political projectors I was but ill entertained theprofessors appearing in my judgment wholly out of their senses whichis a scene that never fails to make me melancholy. These unhappy peoplewere proposing schemes for persuading monarchs to choose favouritesupon the score of their wisdom capacity and virtue of teachingministers to consult the public good of rewarding merit greatabilities eminent services of instructing princes to know their trueinterest by placing it on the same foundation with that of theirpeople of choosing for employments persons qualified to exercise themwith many other wild impossible chimeras that never entered beforeinto the heart of man to conceive and confirmed in me the oldobservation that there is nothing so extravagant and irrationalwhich some philosophers have not maintained for truth.But however I shall so far do justice to this part of the Academy asto acknowledge that all of them were not so visionary. There was a mostingenious doctor who seemed to be perfectly versed in the whole natureand system of government. This illustrious person had very usefullyemployed his studies in finding out effectual remedies for alldiseases and corruptions to which the several kinds of publicadministration are subject by the vices or infirmities of those whogovern as well as by the licentiousness of those who are to obey. Forinstance whereas all writers and reasoners have agreed that there isa strict universal resemblance between the natural and the politicalbody can there be any thing more evident than that the health of bothmust be preserved and the diseases cured by the same prescriptionsIt is allowed that senates and great councils are often troubled withredundant ebullient and other peccant humours with many diseases ofthe head and more of the heart with strong convulsions with grievouscontractions of the nerves and sinews in both hands but especially theright with spleen flatus vertigos and deliriums with scrofuloustumours full of fetid purulent matter with sour frothy ructationswith canine appetites and crudeness of digestion besides many othersneedless to mention. This doctor therefore proposed that upon themeeting of the senate certain physicians should attend it the threefirst days of their sitting and at the close of each days debate feelthe pulses of every senator after which having maturely consideredand consulted upon the nature of the several maladies and the methodsof cure they should on the fourth day return to the senate houseattended by their apothecaries stored with proper medicines and beforethe members sat administer to each of them lenitives aperitivesabstersives corrosives restringents palliatives laxativescephalalgics icterics apophlegmatics acoustics as their severalcases required and according as these medicines should operaterepeat alter or omit them at the next meeting.This project could not be of any great expense to the public and mightin my poor opinion be of much use for the despatch of business inthose countries where senates have any share in the legislative powerbeget unanimity shorten debates open a few mouths which are nowclosed and close many more which are now open curb the petulancy ofthe young and correct the positiveness of the old rouse the stupidand damp the pert.Again because it is a general complaint that the favourites ofprinces are troubled with short and weak memories the same doctorproposed that whoever attended a first minister after having toldhis business with the utmost brevity and in the plainest wordsshould at his departure give the said minister a tweak by the noseor a kick in the belly or tread on his corns or lug him thrice byboth ears or run a pin into his breech or pinch his arm black andblue to prevent forgetfulness and at every levee day repeat the sameoperation till the business were done or absolutely refused.He likewise directed that every senator in the great council of anation after he had delivered his opinion and argued in the defenceof it should be obliged to give his vote directly contrary because ifthat were done the result would infallibly terminate in the good ofthe public.When parties in a state are violent he offered a wonderful contrivanceto reconcile them. The method is this You take a hundred leaders ofeach party you dispose them into couples of such whose heads arenearest of a size then let two nice operators saw off the occiput ofeach couple at the same time in such a manner that the brain may beequally divided. Let the occiputs thus cut off be interchangedapplying each to the head of his opposite partyman. It seems indeed tobe a work that requires some exactness but the professor assured usthat if it were dexterously performed the cure would be infallible.For he argued thus that the two half brains being left to debate thematter between themselves within the space of one skull would sooncome to a good understanding and produce that moderation as well asregularity of thinking so much to be wished for in the heads of thosewho imagine they come into the world only to watch and govern itsmotion and as to the difference of brains in quantity or qualityamong those who are directors in faction the doctor assured us fromhis own knowledge that it was a perfect trifle.I heard a very warm debate between two professors about the mostcommodious and effectual ways and means of raising money withoutgrieving the subject. The first affirmed the justest method would beto lay a certain tax upon vices and folly and the sum fixed upon everyman to be rated after the fairest manner by a jury of hisneighbours. The second was of an opinion directly contrary to taxthose qualities of body and mind for which men chiefly valuethemselves the rate to be more or less according to the degrees ofexcelling the decision whereof should be left entirely to their ownbreast. The highest tax was upon men who are the greatest favouritesof the other sex and the assessments according to the number andnature of the favours they have received for which they are allowedto be their own vouchers. Wit valour and politeness were likewiseproposed to be largely taxed and collected in the same manner byevery persons giving his own word for the quantum of what hepossessed. But as to honour justice wisdom and learning they shouldnot be taxed at all because they are qualifications of so singular akind that no man will either allow them in his neighbour or value themin himself.The women were proposed to be taxed according to their beauty and skillin dressing wherein they had the same privilege with the men to bedetermined by their own judgment. But constancy chastity good senseand good nature were not rated because they would not bear the chargeof collecting.To keep senators in the interest of the crown it was proposed that themembers should raffle for employments every man first taking an oathand giving security that he would vote for the court whether he wonor not after which the losers had in their turn the liberty ofraffling upon the next vacancy. Thus hope and expectation would bekept alive none would complain of broken promises but impute theirdisappointments wholly to fortune whose shoulders are broader andstronger than those of a ministry.Another professor showed me a large paper of instructions fordiscovering plots and conspiracies against the government. He advisedgreat statesmen to examine into the diet of all suspected personstheir times of eating upon which side they lay in bed with which handthey wipe their posteriors take a strict view of their excrementsand from the colour the odour the taste the consistence thecrudeness or maturity of digestion form a judgment of their thoughtsand designs because men are never so serious thoughtful and intentas when they are at stool which he found by frequent experiment forin such conjunctures when he used merely as a trial to considerwhich was the best way of murdering the king his ordure would have atincture of green but quite different when he thought only of raisingan insurrection or burning the metropolis.The whole discourse was written with great acuteness containing manyobservations both curious and useful for politicians but as Iconceived not altogether complete. This I ventured to tell the authorand offered if he pleased to supply him with some additions. Hereceived my proposition with more compliance than is usual amongwriters especially those of the projecting species professing hewould be glad to receive further information.I told him that in the kingdom of Tribnia a by the nativescalled Langden b where I had sojourned some time in my travelsthe bulk of the people consist in a manner wholly of discovererswitnesses informers accusers prosecutors evidences swearerstogether with their several subservient and subaltern instruments allunder the colours the conduct and the pay of ministers of state andtheir deputies. The plots in that kingdom are usually the workmanshipof those persons who desire to raise their own characters of profoundpoliticians to restore new vigour to a crazy administration to stifleor divert general discontents to fill their coffers with forfeituresand raise or sink the opinion of public credit as either shall bestanswer their private advantage. It is first agreed and settled amongthem what suspected persons shall be accused of a plot theneffectual care is taken to secure all their letters and papers and putthe owners in chains. These papers are delivered to a set of artistsvery dexterous in finding out the mysterious meanings of wordssyllables and letters for instance they can discover a close stoolto signify a privy council a flock of geese a senate a lame dog aninvader a codshead a the plague a standing army a buzzard aprime minister the gout a high priest a gibbet a secretary ofstate a chamber pot a committee of grandees a sieve a court lady abroom a revolution a mousetrap an employment a bottomless pit atreasury a sink a court a cap and bells a favourite a broken reeda court of justice an empty tun a general a running sore theadministration. When this method fails they have two others more effectual which thelearned among them call acrostics and anagrams. First they candecipher all initial letters into political meanings. Thus N. shallsignify a plot B. a regiment of horse L. a fleet at sea orsecondly by transposing the letters of the alphabet in any suspectedpaper they can lay open the deepest designs of a discontented party.So for example if I should say in a letter to a friend Our brotherTom has just got the piles a skilful decipherer would discover thatthe same letters which compose that sentence may be analysed into thefollowing words Resist a plot is brought home The tour. And thisis the anagrammatic method.The professor made me great acknowledgments for communicating theseobservations and promised to make honourable mention of me in histreatise.I saw nothing in this country that could invite me to a longercontinuance and began to think of returning home to England.CHAPTER VII.The author leaves Lagado arrives at Maldonada. No ship ready. He takesa short voyage to Glubbdubdrib. His reception by the governor.The continent of which this kingdom is apart extends itself as Ihave reason to believe eastward to that unknown tract of Americawestward of California and north to the Pacific Ocean which is notabove a hundred and fifty miles from Lagado where there is a goodport and much commerce with the great island of Luggnagg situated tothe northwest about degrees north latitude and longitude. Thisisland of Luggnagg stands southeastward of Japan about a hundredleagues distant. There is a strict alliance between the Japaneseemperor and the king of Luggnagg which affords frequent opportunitiesof sailing from one island to the other. I determined therefore todirect my course this way in order to direct my return to Europe. Ihired two mules with a guide to show me the way and carry my smallbaggage. I took leave of my noble protector who had shown me so muchfavour and made me a generous present at my departure.My journey was without any accident or adventure worth relating. When Iarrived at the port of Maldonada for so it is called there was noship in the harbour bound for Luggnagg nor likely to be in some time.The town is about as large as Portsmouth. I soon fell into someacquaintance and was very hospitably received. A gentleman ofdistinction said to me that since the ships bound for Luggnagg couldnot be ready in less than a month it might be no disagreeableamusement for me to take a trip to the little island of Glubbdubdribabout five leagues off to the southwest. He offered himself and afriend to accompany me and that I should be provided with a smallconvenient bark for the voyage.Glubbdubdrib as nearly as I can interpret the word signifies theisland of sorcerers or magicians. It is about one third as large as theIsle of Wight and extremely fruitful it is governed by the head of acertain tribe who are all magicians. This tribe marries only amongeach other and the eldest in succession is prince or governor. He hasa noble palace and a park of about three thousand acres surrounded bya wall of hewn stone twenty feet high. In this park are several smallenclosures for cattle corn and gardening.The governor and his family are served and attended by domestics of akind somewhat unusual. By his skill in necromancy he has a power ofcalling whom he pleases from the dead and commanding their service fortwentyfour hours but no longer nor can he call the same persons upagain in less than three months except upon very extraordinaryoccasions.When we arrived at the island which was about eleven in the morningone of the gentlemen who accompanied me went to the governor anddesired admittance for a stranger who came on purpose to have thehonour of attending on his highness. This was immediately granted andwe all three entered the gate of the palace between two rows of guardsarmed and dressed after a very antic manner and with something intheir countenances that made my flesh creep with a horror I cannotexpress. We passed through several apartments between servants of thesame sort ranked on each side as before till we came to the chamberof presence where after three profound obeisances and a few generalquestions we were permitted to sit on three stools near the loweststep of his highnesss throne. He understood the language ofBalnibarbi although it was different from that of this island. Hedesired me to give him some account of my travels and to let me seethat I should be treated without ceremony he dismissed all hisattendants with a turn of his finger at which to my greatastonishment they vanished in an instant like visions in a dream whenwe awake on a sudden. I could not recover myself in some time till thegovernor assured me that I should receive no hurt and observing mytwo companions to be under no concern who had been often entertainedin the same manner I began to take courage and related to hishighness a short history of my several adventures yet not without somehesitation and frequently looking behind me to the place where I hadseen those domestic spectres. I had the honour to dine with thegovernor where a new set of ghosts served up the meat and waited attable. I now observed myself to be less terrified than I had been inthe morning. I stayed till sunset but humbly desired his highness toexcuse me for not accepting his invitation of lodging in the palace. Mytwo friends and I lay at a private house in the town adjoining whichis the capital of this little island and the next morning we returnedto pay our duty to the governor as he was pleased to command us.After this manner we continued in the island for ten days most part ofevery day with the governor and at night in our lodging. I soon grewso familiarized to the sight of spirits that after the third or fourthtime they gave me no emotion at all or if I had any apprehensionsleft my curiosity prevailed over them. For his highness the governorordered me to call up whatever persons I would choose to name and inwhatever numbers among all the dead from the beginning of the world tothe present time and command them to answer any questions I shouldthink fit to ask with this condition that my questions must beconfined within the compass of the times they lived in. And one thing Imight depend upon that they would certainly tell me the truth forlying was a talent of no use in the lower world.I made my humble acknowledgments to his highness for so great a favour.We were in a chamber from whence there was a fair prospect into thepark. And because my first inclination was to be entertained withscenes of pomp and magnificence I desired to see Alexander the Greatat the head of his army just after the battle of Arbela which upon amotion of the governors finger immediately appeared in a large fieldunder the window where we stood. Alexander was called up into the roomit was with great difficulty that I understood his Greek and had butlittle of my own. He assured me upon his honour that he was notpoisoned but died of a bad fever by excessive drinking.Next I saw Hannibal passing the Alps who told me he had not a dropof vinegar in his camp.I saw Csar and Pompey at the head of their troops just ready toengage. I saw the former in his last great triumph. I desired that thesenate of Rome might appear before me in one large chamber and anassembly of somewhat a later age in counterview in another. The firstseemed to be an assembly of heroes and demigods the other a knot ofpedlars pickpockets highwaymen and bullies.The governor at my request gave the sign for Csar and Brutus toadvance towards us. I was struck with a profound veneration at thesight of Brutus and could easily discover the most consummate virtuethe greatest intrepidity and firmness of mind the truest love of hiscountry and general benevolence for mankind in every lineament of hiscountenance. I observed with much pleasure that these two personswere in good intelligence with each other and Csar freely confessedto me that the greatest actions of his own life were not equal bymany degrees to the glory of taking it away. I had the honour to havemuch conversation with Brutus and was told that his ancestor JuniusSocrates Epaminondas Cato the younger Sir Thomas More and himselfwere perpetually together a sextumvirate to which all the ages ofthe world cannot add a seventh.It would be tedious to trouble the reader with relating what vastnumbers of illustrious persons were called up to gratify thatinsatiable desire I had to see the world in every period of antiquityplaced before me. I chiefly fed my eyes with beholding the destroyersof tyrants and usurpers and the restorers of liberty to oppressed andinjured nations. But it is impossible to express the satisfaction Ireceived in my own mind after such a manner as to make it a suitableentertainment to the reader.CHAPTER VIII.A further account of Glubbdubdrib. Ancient and modern historycorrected.Having a desire to see those ancients who were most renowned for witand learning I set apart one day on purpose. I proposed that Homer andAristotle might appear at the head of all their commentators but thesewere so numerous that some hundreds were forced to attend in thecourt and outward rooms of the palace. I knew and could distinguishthose two heroes at first sight not only from the crowd but fromeach other. Homer was the taller and comelier person of the two walkedvery erect for one of his age and his eyes were the most quick andpiercing I ever beheld. Aristotle stooped much and made use of astaff. His visage was meagre his hair lank and thin and his voicehollow. I soon discovered that both of them were perfect strangers tothe rest of the company and had never seen or heard of them beforeand I had a whisper from a ghost who shall be nameless that thesecommentators always kept in the most distant quarters from theirprincipals in the lower world through a consciousness of shame andguilt because they had so horribly misrepresented the meaning of thoseauthors to posterity. I introduced Didymus and Eustathius to Homerand prevailed on him to treat them better than perhaps they deservedfor he soon found they wanted a genius to enter into the spirit of apoet. But Aristotle was out of all patience with the account I gave himof Scotus and Ramus as I presented them to him and he asked themwhether the rest of the tribe were as great dunces as themselvesI then desired the governor to call up Descartes and Gassendi withwhom I prevailed to explain their systems to Aristotle. This greatphilosopher freely acknowledged his own mistakes in natural philosophybecause he proceeded in many things upon conjecture as all men mustdo and he found that Gassendi who had made the doctrine of Epicurusas palatable as he could and the vortices of Descartes were equallyto be exploded. He predicted the same fate to attraction whereof thepresent learned are such zealous asserters. He said that new systemsof nature were but new fashions which would vary in every age andeven those who pretend to demonstrate them from mathematicalprinciples would flourish but a short period of time and be out ofvogue when that was determined.I spent five days in conversing with many others of the ancientlearned. I saw most of the first Roman emperors. I prevailed on thegovernor to call up Heliogabaluss cooks to dress us a dinner but theycould not show us much of their skill for want of materials. A helotof Agesilaus made us a dish of Spartan broth but I was not able to getdown a second spoonful.The two gentlemen who conducted me to the island were pressed bytheir private affairs to return in three days which I employed inseeing some of the modern dead who had made the greatest figure fortwo or three hundred years past in our own and other countries ofEurope and having been always a great admirer of old illustriousfamilies I desired the governor would call up a dozen or two of kingswith their ancestors in order for eight or nine generations. But mydisappointment was grievous and unexpected. For instead of a longtrain with royal diadems I saw in one family two fiddlers threespruce courtiers and an Italian prelate. In another a barber anabbot and two cardinals. I have too great a veneration for crownedheads to dwell any longer on so nice a subject. But as to countsmarquises dukes earls and the like I was not so scrupulous. And Iconfess it was not without some pleasure that I found myself able totrace the particular features by which certain families aredistinguished up to their originals. I could plainly discover whenceone family derives a long chin why a second has abounded with knavesfor two generations and fools for two more why a third happened to becrackbrained and a fourth to be sharpers whence it came whatPolydore Virgil says of a certain great house Nec vir fortis necfemina casta how cruelty falsehood and cowardice grew to becharacteristics by which certain families are distinguished as much asby their coats of arms who first brought the pox into a noble housewhich has lineally descended scrofulous tumours to their posterity.Neither could I wonder at all this when I saw such an interruption oflineages by pages lackeys valets coachmen gamesters fiddlersplayers captains and pickpockets.I was chiefly disgusted with modern history. For having strictlyexamined all the persons of greatest name in the courts of princes fora hundred years past I found how the world had been misled byprostitute writers to ascribe the greatest exploits in war tocowards the wisest counsel to fools sincerity to flatterers Romanvirtue to betrayers of their country piety to atheists chastity tosodomites truth to informers how many innocent and excellent personshad been condemned to death or banishment by the practising of greatministers upon the corruption of judges and the malice of factionshow many villains had been exalted to the highest places of trustpower dignity and profit how great a share in the motions and eventsof courts councils and senates might be challenged by bawds whorespimps parasites and buffoons. How low an opinion I had of humanwisdom and integrity when I was truly informed of the springs andmotives of great enterprises and revolutions in the world and of thecontemptible accidents to which they owed their success.Here I discovered the roguery and ignorance of those who pretend towrite anecdotes or secret history who send so many kings to theirgraves with a cup of poison will repeat the discourse between a princeand chief minister where no witness was by unlock the thoughts andcabinets of ambassadors and secretaries of state and have theperpetual misfortune to be mistaken. Here I discovered the true causesof many great events that have surprised the world how a whore cangovern the backstairs the backstairs a council and the council asenate. A general confessed in my presence that he got a victorypurely by the force of cowardice and ill conduct and an admiralthat for want of proper intelligence he beat the enemy to whom heintended to betray the fleet. Three kings protested to me that intheir whole reigns they never did once prefer any person of meritunless by mistake or treachery of some minister in whom they confidedneither would they do it if they were to live again and they showedwith great strength of reason that the royal throne could not besupported without corruption because that positive confident restifftemper which virtue infused into a man was a perpetual clog to publicbusiness.I had the curiosity to inquire in a particular manner by what methodsgreat numbers had procured to themselves high titles of honour andprodigious estates and I confined my inquiry to a very modern periodhowever without grating upon present times because I would be sure togive no offence even to foreigners for I hope the reader need not betold that I do not in the least intend my own country in what I sayupon this occasion a great number of persons concerned were calledup and upon a very slight examination discovered such a scene ofinfamy that I cannot reflect upon it without some seriousness.Perjury oppression subornation fraud pandarism and the likeinfirmities were among the most excusable arts they had to mentionand for these I gave as it was reasonable great allowance. But whensome confessed they owed their greatness and wealth to sodomy orincest others to the prostituting of their own wives and daughtersothers to the betraying of their country or their prince some topoisoning more to the perverting of justice in order to destroy theinnocent I hope I may be pardoned if these discoveries inclined me alittle to abate of that profound veneration which I am naturally aptto pay to persons of high rank who ought to be treated with the utmostrespect due to their sublime dignity by us their inferiors.I had often read of some great services done to princes and states anddesired to see the persons by whom those services were performed. Uponinquiry I was told that their names were to be found on no recordexcept a few of them whom history has represented as the vilest ofrogues and traitors. As to the rest I had never once heard of them.They all appeared with dejected looks and in the meanest habit mostof them telling me they died in poverty and disgrace and the rest ona scaffold or a gibbet.Among others there was one person whose case appeared a littlesingular. He had a youth about eighteen years old standing by his side.He told me he had for many years been commander of a ship and in thesea fight at Actium had the good fortune to break through the enemysgreat line of battle sink three of their capital ships and take afourth which was the sole cause of Antonys flight and of the victorythat ensued that the youth standing by him his only son was killedin the action. He added that upon the confidence of some merit thewar being at an end he went to Rome and solicited at the court ofAugustus to be preferred to a greater ship whose commander had beenkilled but without any regard to his pretensions it was given to aboy who had never seen the sea the son of Libertina who waited on oneof the emperors mistresses. Returning back to his own vessel he wascharged with neglect of duty and the ship given to a favourite page ofPublicola the viceadmiral whereupon he retired to a poor farm at agreat distance from Rome and there ended his life. I was so curiousto know the truth of this story that I desired Agrippa might becalled who was admiral in that fight. He appeared and confirmed thewhole account but with much more advantage to the captain whosemodesty had extenuated or concealed a great part of his merit.I was surprised to find corruption grown so high and so quick in thatempire by the force of luxury so lately introduced which made me lesswonder at many parallel cases in other countries where vices of allkinds have reigned so much longer and where the whole praise as wellas pillage has been engrossed by the chief commander who perhaps hadthe least title to either.As every person called up made exactly the same appearance he had donein the world it gave me melancholy reflections to observe how much therace of humankind was degenerated among us within these hundred yearspast how the pox under all its consequences and denominations hadaltered every lineament of an English countenance shortened the sizeof bodies unbraced the nerves relaxed the sinews and musclesintroduced a sallow complexion and rendered the flesh loose andrancid.I descended so low as to desire some English yeoman of the old stampmight be summoned to appear once so famous for the simplicity of theirmanners diet and dress for justice in their dealings for their truespirit of liberty for their valour and love of their country. Neithercould I be wholly unmoved after comparing the living with the deadwhen I considered how all these pure native virtues were prostitutedfor a piece of money by their grandchildren who in selling theirvotes and managing at elections have acquired every vice andcorruption that can possibly be learned in a court.CHAPTER IX.The author returns to Maldonada. Sails to the kingdom of Luggnagg. Theauthor confined. He is sent for to court. The manner of his admittance.The kings great lenity to his subjects.The day of our departure being come I took leave of his highness theGovernor of Glubbdubdrib and returned with my two companions toMaldonada where after a fortnights waiting a ship was ready to sailfor Luggnagg. The two gentlemen and some others were so generous andkind as to furnish me with provisions and see me on board. I was amonth in this voyage. We had one violent storm and were under anecessity of steering westward to get into the trade wind which holdsfor above sixty leagues. On the st of April we sailed into theriver of Clumegnig which is a seaport town at the southeast point ofLuggnagg. We cast anchor within a league of the town and made a signalfor a pilot. Two of them came on board in less than half an hour bywhom we were guided between certain shoals and rocks which are verydangerous in the passage to a large basin where a fleet may ride insafety within a cables length of the townwall.Some of our sailors whether out of treachery or inadvertence hadinformed the pilots that I was a stranger and great travellerwhereof these gave notice to a customhouse officer by whom I wasexamined very strictly upon my landing. This officer spoke to me in thelanguage of Balnibarbi which by the force of much commerce isgenerally understood in that town especially by seamen and thoseemployed in the customs. I gave him a short account of someparticulars and made my story as plausible and consistent as I couldbut I thought it necessary to disguise my country and call myself aHollander because my intentions were for Japan and I knew the Dutchwere the only Europeans permitted to enter into that kingdom. Itherefore told the officer that having been shipwrecked on the coastof Balnibarbi and cast on a rock I was received up into Laputa orthe flying island of which he had often heard and was nowendeavouring to get to Japan whence I might find a convenience ofreturning to my own country. The officer said I must be confinedtill he could receive orders from court for which he would writeimmediately and hoped to receive an answer in a fortnight. I wascarried to a convenient lodging with a sentry placed at the doorhowever I had the liberty of a large garden and was treated withhumanity enough being maintained all the time at the kings charge. Iwas invited by several persons chiefly out of curiosity because itwas reported that I came from countries very remote of which they hadnever heard.I hired a young man who came in the same ship to be an interpreterhe was a native of Luggnagg but had lived some years at Maldonada andwas a perfect master of both languages. By his assistance I was ableto hold a conversation with those who came to visit me but thisconsisted only of their questions and my answers.The despatch came from court about the time we expected. It contained awarrant for conducting me and my retinue to Traldragdubh orTrildrogdrib for it is pronounced both ways as near as I canremember by a party of ten horse. All my retinue was that poor ladfor an interpreter whom I persuaded into my service and at my humblerequest we had each of us a mule to ride on. A messenger wasdespatched half a days journey before us to give the king notice ofmy approach and to desire that his majesty would please to appoint aday and hour when it would by his gracious pleasure that I might havethe honour to lick the dust before his footstool. This is the courtstyle and I found it to be more than matter of form for upon myadmittance two days after my arrival I was commanded to crawl upon mybelly and lick the floor as I advanced but on account of my being astranger care was taken to have it made so clean that the dust wasnot offensive. However this was a peculiar grace not allowed to anybut persons of the highest rank when they desire an admittance. Naysometimes the floor is strewed with dust on purpose when the person tobe admitted happens to have powerful enemies at court and I have seena great lord with his mouth so crammed that when he had crept to theproper distance from the throne he was not able to speak a word.Neither is there any remedy because it is capital for those whoreceive an audience to spit or wipe their mouths in his majestyspresence. There is indeed another custom which I cannot altogetherapprove of when the king has a mind to put any of his nobles to deathin a gentle indulgent manner he commands the floor to be strewed witha certain brown powder of a deadly composition which being licked upinfallibly kills him in twentyfour hours. But in justice to thisprinces great clemency and the care he has of his subjects liveswherein it were much to be wished that the Monarchs of Europe wouldimitate him it must be mentioned for his honour that strict ordersare given to have the infected parts of the floor well washed afterevery such execution which if his domestics neglect they are indanger of incurring his royal displeasure. I myself heard him givedirections that one of his pages should be whipped whose turn it wasto give notice about washing the floor after an execution butmaliciously had omitted it by which neglect a young lord of greathopes coming to an audience was unfortunately poisoned although theking at that time had no design against his life. But this good princewas so gracious as to forgive the poor page his whipping upon promisethat he would do so no more without special orders.To return from this digression. When I had crept within four yards ofthe throne I raised myself gently upon my knees and then striking myforehead seven times against the ground I pronounced the followingwords as they had been taught me the night before Ickplinggloffthrobb squutserumm blhiop mlashnalt zwin tnodbalkguffh slhiophadgurdlubh asht. This is the compliment established by the laws of theland for all persons admitted to the kings presence. It may berendered into English thus May your celestial majesty outlive thesun eleven moons and a half To this the king returned some answerwhich although I could not understand yet I replied as I had beendirected Fluft drin yalerick dwuldom prastrad mirpush whichproperly signifies My tongue is in the mouth of my friend and bythis expression was meant that I desired leave to bring myinterpreter whereupon the young man already mentioned was accordinglyintroduced by whose intervention I answered as many questions as hismajesty could put in above an hour. I spoke in the Balnibarbian tongueand my interpreter delivered my meaning in that of Luggnagg.The king was much delighted with my company and ordered hisbliffmarklub or highchamberlain to appoint a lodging in the courtfor me and my interpreter with a daily allowance for my table and alarge purse of gold for my common expenses.I staid three months in this country out of perfect obedience to hismajesty who was pleased highly to favour me and made me veryhonourable offers. But I thought it more consistent with prudence andjustice to pass the remainder of my days with my wife and family.CHAPTER X.The Luggnaggians commended. A particular description of theStruldbrugs with many conversations between the author and someeminent persons upon that subject.The Luggnaggians are a polite and generous people and although theyare not without some share of that pride which is peculiar to allEastern countries yet they show themselves courteous to strangersespecially such who are countenanced by the court. I had manyacquaintance and among persons of the best fashion and being alwaysattended by my interpreter the conversation we had was notdisagreeable.One day in much good company I was asked by a person of qualitywhether I had seen any of their struldbrugs or immortals I saidI had not and desired he would explain to me what he meant by suchan appellation applied to a mortal creature. He told me thatsometimes though very rarely a child happened to be born in a familywith a red circular spot in the forehead directly over the lefteyebrow which was an infallible mark that it should never die. Thespot as he described it was about the compass of a silverthreepence but in the course of time grew larger and changed itscolour for at twelve years old it became green so continued till fiveand twenty then turned to a deep blue at five and forty it grew coalblack and as large as an English shilling but never admitted anyfurther alteration. He said these births were so rare that he didnot believe there could be above eleven hundred struldbrugs of bothsexes in the whole kingdom of which he computed about fifty in themetropolis and among the rest a young girl born about three yearsago that these productions were not peculiar to any family but a mereeffect of chance and the children of the struldbrugs themselves wereequally mortal with the rest of the people.I freely own myself to have been struck with inexpressible delightupon hearing this account and the person who gave it me happening tounderstand the Balnibarbian language which I spoke very well I couldnot forbear breaking out into expressions perhaps a little tooextravagant. I cried out as in a rapture Happy nation where everychild hath at least a chance for being immortal Happy people whoenjoy so many living examples of ancient virtue and have masters readyto instruct them in the wisdom of all former ages but happiest beyondall comparison are those excellent struldbrugs who being bornexempt from that universal calamity of human nature have their mindsfree and disengaged without the weight and depression of spiritscaused by the continual apprehensions of death I discovered myadmiration that I had not observed any of these illustrious personsat court the black spot on the forehead being so remarkable adistinction that I could not have easily overlooked it and it wasimpossible that his majesty a most judicious prince should notprovide himself with a good number of such wise and able counsellors.Yet perhaps the virtue of those reverend sages was too strict for thecorrupt and libertine manners of a court and we often find byexperience that young men are too opinionated and volatile to beguided by the sober dictates of their seniors. However since the kingwas pleased to allow me access to his royal person I was resolvedupon the very first occasion to deliver my opinion to him on thismatter freely and at large by the help of my interpreter and whetherhe would please to take my advice or not yet in one thing I wasdetermined that his majesty having frequently offered me anestablishment in this country I would with great thankfulness acceptthe favour and pass my life here in the conversation of those superiorbeings the struldbrugs if they would please to admit me.The gentleman to whom I addressed my discourse because as I havealready observed he spoke the language of Balnibarbi said to me witha sort of a smile which usually arises from pity to the ignorant thathe was glad of any occasion to keep me among them and desired mypermission to explain to the company what I had spoke. He did so andthey talked together for some time in their own language whereof Iunderstood not a syllable neither could I observe by theircountenances what impression my discourse had made on them. After ashort silence the same person told me that his friends and mine sohe thought fit to express himself were very much pleased with thejudicious remarks I had made on the great happiness and advantages ofimmortal life and they were desirous to know in a particular mannerwhat scheme of living I should have formed to myself if it had fallento my lot to have been born a struldbrug.I answered it was easy to be eloquent on so copious and delightful asubject especially to me who had been often apt to amuse myself withvisions of what I should do if I were a king a general or a greatlord and upon this very case I had frequently run over the wholesystem how I should employ myself and pass the time if I were sure tolive for ever.That if it had been my good fortune to come into the world astruldbrug as soon as I could discover my own happiness byunderstanding the difference between life and death I would firstresolve by all arts and methods whatsoever to procure myself riches.In the pursuit of which by thrift and management I might reasonablyexpect in about two hundred years to be the wealthiest man in thekingdom. In the second place I would from my earliest youth applymyself to the study of arts and sciences by which I should arrive intime to excel all others in learning. Lastly I would carefully recordevery action and event of consequence that happened in the publicimpartially draw the characters of the several successions of princesand great ministers of state with my own observations on every point.I would exactly set down the several changes in customs languagefashions of dress diet and diversions. By all which acquirements Ishould be a living treasure of knowledge and wisdom and certainlybecome the oracle of the nation.I would never marry after threescore but live in a hospitable manneryet still on the saving side. I would entertain myself in forming anddirecting the minds of hopeful young men by convincing them from myown remembrance experience and observation fortified by numerousexamples of the usefulness of virtue in public and private life. Butmy choice and constant companions should be a set of my own immortalbrotherhood among whom I would elect a dozen from the most ancientdown to my own contemporaries. Where any of these wanted fortunes Iwould provide them with convenient lodges round my own estate and havesome of them always at my table only mingling a few of the mostvaluable among you mortals whom length of time would harden me to losewith little or no reluctance and treat your posterity after the samemanner just as a man diverts himself with the annual succession ofpinks and tulips in his garden without regretting the loss of thosewhich withered the preceding year.These struldbrugs and I would mutually communicate our observationsand memorials through the course of time remark the severalgradations by which corruption steals into the world and oppose it inevery step by giving perpetual warning and instruction to mankindwhich added to the strong influence of our own example would probablyprevent that continual degeneracy of human nature so justly complainedof in all ages.Add to this the pleasure of seeing the various revolutions of statesand empires the changes in the lower and upper world ancient citiesin ruins and obscure villages become the seats of kings famous riverslessening into shallow brooks the ocean leaving one coast dry andoverwhelming another the discovery of many countries yet unknownbarbarity overrunning the politest nations and the most barbarousbecome civilized. I should then see the discovery of the longitude theperpetual motion the universal medicine and many other greatinventions brought to the utmost perfection.What wonderful discoveries should we make in astronomy by outlivingand confirming our own predictions by observing the progress andreturn of comets with the changes of motion in the sun moon andstarsI enlarged upon many other topics which the natural desire of endlesslife and sublunary happiness could easily furnish me with. When I hadended and the sum of my discourse had been interpreted as before tothe rest of the company there was a good deal of talk among them inthe language of the country not without some laughter at my expense.At last the same gentleman who had been my interpreter said he wasdesired by the rest to set me right in a few mistakes which I hadfallen into through the common imbecility of human nature and uponthat allowance was less answerable for them. That this breed ofstruldbrugs was peculiar to their country for there were no suchpeople either in Balnibarbi or Japan where he had the honour to beambassador from his majesty and found the natives in both thosekingdoms very hard to believe that the fact was possible and itappeared from my astonishment when he first mentioned the matter to methat I received it as a thing wholly new and scarcely to be credited.That in the two kingdoms above mentioned where during his residencehe had conversed very much he observed long life to be the universaldesire and wish of mankind. That whoever had one foot in the grave wassure to hold back the other as strongly as he could. That the oldesthad still hopes of living one day longer and looked on death as thegreatest evil from which nature always prompted him to retreat. Onlyin this island of Luggnagg the appetite for living was not so eagerfrom the continual example of the struldbrugs before their eyes.That the system of living contrived by me was unreasonable andunjust because it supposed a perpetuity of youth health and vigourwhich no man could be so foolish to hope however extravagant he may bein his wishes. That the question therefore was not whether a man wouldchoose to be always in the prime of youth attended with prosperity andhealth but how he would pass a perpetual life under all the usualdisadvantages which old age brings along with it. For although few menwill avow their desires of being immortal upon such hard conditionsyet in the two kingdoms before mentioned of Balnibarbi and Japan heobserved that every man desired to put off death some time longer letit approach ever so late and he rarely heard of any man who diedwillingly except he were incited by the extremity of grief or torture.And he appealed to me whether in those countries I had travelled aswell as my own I had not observed the same general disposition.After this preface he gave me a particular account of thestruldbrugs among them. He said they commonly acted like mortalstill about thirty years old after which by degrees they grewmelancholy and dejected increasing in both till they came tofourscore. This he learned from their own confession for otherwisethere not being above two or three of that species born in an age theywere too few to form a general observation by. When they came tofourscore years which is reckoned the extremity of living in thiscountry they had not only all the follies and infirmities of other oldmen but many more which arose from the dreadful prospect of neverdying. They were not only opinionative peevish covetous morosevain talkative but incapable of friendship and dead to all naturalaffection which never descended below their grandchildren. Envy andimpotent desires are their prevailing passions. But those objectsagainst which their envy seems principally directed are the vices ofthe younger sort and the deaths of the old. By reflecting on theformer they find themselves cut off from all possibility of pleasureand whenever they see a funeral they lament and repine that othershave gone to a harbour of rest to which they themselves never can hopeto arrive. They have no remembrance of anything but what they learnedand observed in their youth and middleage and even that is veryimperfect and for the truth or particulars of any fact it is safer todepend on common tradition than upon their best recollections. Theleast miserable among them appear to be those who turn to dotage andentirely lose their memories these meet with more pity and assistancebecause they want many bad qualities which abound in others.If a struldbrug happen to marry one of his own kind the marriage isdissolved of course by the courtesy of the kingdom as soon as theyounger of the two comes to be fourscore for the law thinks it areasonable indulgence that those who are condemned without any faultof their own to a perpetual continuance in the world should not havetheir misery doubled by the load of a wife.As soon as they have completed the term of eighty years they arelooked on as dead in law their heirs immediately succeed to theirestates only a small pittance is reserved for their support and thepoor ones are maintained at the public charge. After that period theyare held incapable of any employment of trust or profit they cannotpurchase lands or take leases neither are they allowed to bewitnesses in any cause either civil or criminal not even for thedecision of meers and bounds.At ninety they lose their teeth and hair they have at that age nodistinction of taste but eat and drink whatever they can get withoutrelish or appetite. The diseases they were subject to still continuewithout increasing or diminishing. In talking they forget the commonappellation of things and the names of persons even of those who aretheir nearest friends and relations. For the same reason they nevercan amuse themselves with reading because their memory will not serveto carry them from the beginning of a sentence to the end and by thisdefect they are deprived of the only entertainment whereof they mightotherwise be capable.The language of this country being always upon the flux thestruldbrugs of one age do not understand those of another neitherare they able after two hundred years to hold any conversationfarther than by a few general words with their neighbours themortals and thus they lie under the disadvantage of living likeforeigners in their own country.This was the account given me of the struldbrugs as near as I canremember. I afterwards saw five or six of different ages the youngestnot above two hundred years old who were brought to me at severaltimes by some of my friends but although they were told that I was agreat traveller and had seen all the world they had not the leastcuriosity to ask me a question only desired I would give themslumskudask or a token of remembrance which is a modest way ofbegging to avoid the law that strictly forbids it because they areprovided for by the public although indeed with a very scantyallowance.They are despised and hated by all sorts of people. When one of them isborn it is reckoned ominous and their birth is recorded veryparticularly so that you may know their age by consulting the registerwhich however has not been kept above a thousand years past or atleast has been destroyed by time or public disturbances. But the usualway of computing how old they are is by asking them what kings orgreat persons they can remember and then consulting history forinfallibly the last prince in their mind did not begin his reign afterthey were fourscore years old.They were the most mortifying sight I ever beheld and the women morehorrible than the men. Besides the usual deformities in extreme oldage they acquired an additional ghastliness in proportion to theirnumber of years which is not to be described and among half a dozenI soon distinguished which was the eldest although there was not abovea century or two between them.The reader will easily believe that from what I had heard and seen mykeen appetite for perpetuity of life was much abated. I grew heartilyashamed of the pleasing visions I had formed and thought no tyrantcould invent a death into which I would not run with pleasure fromsuch a life. The king heard of all that had passed between me and myfriends upon this occasion and rallied me very pleasantly wishing Icould send a couple of struldbrugs to my own country to arm ourpeople against the fear of death but this it seems is forbidden bythe fundamental laws of the kingdom or else I should have been wellcontent with the trouble and expense of transporting them.I could not but agree that the laws of this kingdom relative to thestruldbrugs were founded upon the strongest reasons and such as anyother country would be under the necessity of enacting in the likecircumstances. Otherwise as avarice is the necessary consequence ofold age those immortals would in time become proprietors of the wholenation and engross the civil power which for want of abilities tomanage must end in the ruin of the public.CHAPTER XI.The author leaves Luggnagg and sails to Japan. From thence he returnsin a Dutch ship to Amsterdam and from Amsterdam to England.I thought this account of the struldbrugs might be some entertainmentto the reader because it seems to be a little out of the common wayat least I do not remember to have met the like in any book of travelsthat has come to my hands and if I am deceived my excuse must bethat it is necessary for travellers who describe the same country veryoften to agree in dwelling on the same particulars without deservingthe censure of having borrowed or transcribed from those who wrotebefore them.There is indeed a perpetual commerce between this kingdom and the greatempire of Japan and it is very probable that the Japanese authors mayhave given some account of the struldbrugs but my stay in Japan wasso short and I was so entirely a stranger to the language that I wasnot qualified to make any inquiries. But I hope the Dutch upon thisnotice will be curious and able enough to supply my defects.His majesty having often pressed me to accept some employment in hiscourt and finding me absolutely determined to return to my nativecountry was pleased to give me his license to depart and honoured mewith a letter of recommendation under his own hand to the Emperor ofJapan. He likewise presented me with four hundred and fortyfour largepieces of gold this nation delighting in even numbers and a reddiamond which I sold in England for eleven hundred pounds.On the th day of May I took a solemn leave of his majesty andall my friends. This prince was so gracious as to order a guard toconduct me to Glanguenstald which is a royal port to the southwestpart of the island. In six days I found a vessel ready to carry me toJapan and spent fifteen days in the voyage. We landed at a smallporttown called Xamoschi situated on the southeast part of Japanthe town lies on the western point where there is a narrow straitleading northward into a long arm of the sea upon the northwest partof which Yedo the metropolis stands. At landing I showed thecustomhouse officers my letter from the king of Luggnagg to hisimperial majesty. They knew the seal perfectly well it was as broad asthe palm of my hand. The impression was A king lifting up a lamebeggar from the earth. The magistrates of the town hearing of myletter received me as a public minister. They provided me withcarriages and servants and bore my charges to Yedo where I wasadmitted to an audience and delivered my letter which was opened withgreat ceremony and explained to the Emperor by an interpreter whothen gave me notice by his majestys order that I should signify myrequest and whatever it were it should be granted for the sake ofhis royal brother of Luggnagg. This interpreter was a person employedto transact affairs with the Hollanders. He soon conjectured by mycountenance that I was a European and therefore repeated hismajestys commands in Low Dutch which he spoke perfectly well. Ianswered as I had before determined that I was a Dutch merchantshipwrecked in a very remote country whence I had travelled by sea andland to Luggnagg and then took shipping for Japan where I knew mycountrymen often traded and with some of these I hoped to get anopportunity of returning into Europe I therefore most humbly entreatedhis royal favour to give order that I should be conducted in safety toNangasac. To this I added another petition that for the sake of mypatron the king of Luggnagg his majesty would condescend to excuse myperforming the ceremony imposed on my countrymen of trampling upon thecrucifix because I had been thrown into his kingdom by my misfortuneswithout any intention of trading. When this latter petition wasinterpreted to the Emperor he seemed a little surprised and said hebelieved I was the first of my countrymen who ever made any scruple inthis point and that he began to doubt whether I was a real Hollanderor not but rather suspected I must be a Christian. However for thereasons I had offered but chiefly to gratify the king of Luggnagg byan uncommon mark of his favour he would comply with the singularity ofmy humour but the affair must be managed with dexterity and hisofficers should be commanded to let me pass as it were byforgetfulness. For he assured me that if the secret should bediscovered by my countrymen the Dutch they would cut my throat in thevoyage. I returned my thanks by the interpreter for so unusual afavour and some troops being at that time on their march to Nangasacthe commanding officer had orders to convey me safe thither withparticular instructions about the business of the crucifix.On the th day of June I arrived at Nangasac after a very longand troublesome journey. I soon fell into the company of some Dutchsailors belonging to the Amboyna of Amsterdam a stout ship of tons. I had lived long in Holland pursuing my studies at Leyden and Ispoke Dutch well. The seamen soon knew from whence I came last theywere curious to inquire into my voyages and course of life. I made up astory as short and probable as I could but concealed the greatestpart. I knew many persons in Holland. I was able to invent names for myparents whom I pretended to be obscure people in the province ofGelderland. I would have given the captain one Theodorus Vangrultwhat he pleased to ask for my voyage to Holland but understanding Iwas a surgeon he was contented to take half the usual rate oncondition that I would serve him in the way of my calling. Before wetook shipping I was often asked by some of the crew whether I hadperformed the ceremony above mentioned. I evaded the question bygeneral answers that I had satisfied the Emperor and court in allparticulars. However a malicious rogue of a skipper went to anofficer and pointing to me told him I had not yet trampled on thecrucifix but the other who had received instructions to let me passgave the rascal twenty strokes on the shoulders with a bamboo afterwhich I was no more troubled with such questions.Nothing happened worth mentioning in this voyage. We sailed with a fairwind to the Cape of Good Hope where we staid only to take in freshwater. On the th of April we arrived safe at Amsterdam havinglost only three men by sickness in the voyage and a fourth who fellfrom the foremast into the sea not far from the coast of Guinea. FromAmsterdam I soon after set sail for England in a small vesselbelonging to that city.On the th of April we put in at the Downs. I landed nextmorning and saw once more my native country after an absence of fiveyears and six months complete. I went straight to Redriff where Iarrived the same day at two in the afternoon and found my wife andfamily in good health.PART IV. A VOYAGE TO THE COUNTRY OF THE HOUYHNHNMS.CHAPTER I.The author sets out as captain of a ship. His men conspire against himconfine him a long time to his cabin and set him on shore in anunknown land. He travels up into the country. The Yahoos a strangesort of animal described. The author meets two Houyhnhnms.I continued at home with my wife and children about five months in avery happy condition if I could have learned the lesson of knowingwhen I was well. I left my poor wife big with child and accepted anadvantageous offer made me to be captain of the Adventurer a stoutmerchantman of tons for I understood navigation well and beinggrown weary of a surgeons employment at sea which however I couldexercise upon occasion I took a skilful young man of that calling oneRobert Purefoy into my ship. We set sail from Portsmouth upon the thday of August on the th we met with Captain Pocock ofBristol at Teneriffe who was going to the bay of Campechy to cutlogwood. On the th he was parted from us by a storm I heard sincemy return that his ship foundered and none escaped but one cabin boy.He was an honest man and a good sailor but a little too positive inhis own opinions which was the cause of his destruction as it hasbeen with several others for if he had followed my advice he mighthave been safe at home with his family at this time as well as myself.I had several men who died in my ship of calentures so that I wasforced to get recruits out of Barbadoes and the Leeward Islands whereI touched by the direction of the merchants who employed me which Ihad soon too much cause to repent for I found afterwards that most ofthem had been buccaneers. I had fifty hands on board and my orderswere that I should trade with the Indians in the SouthSea and makewhat discoveries I could. These rogues whom I had picked up debauchedmy other men and they all formed a conspiracy to seize the ship andsecure me which they did one morning rushing into my cabin andbinding me hand and foot threatening to throw me overboard if Ioffered to stir. I told them I was their prisoner and would submit.This they made me swear to do and then they unbound me only fasteningone of my legs with a chain near my bed and placed a sentry at mydoor with his piece charged who was commanded to shoot me dead if Iattempted my liberty. They sent me down victuals and drink and tookthe government of the ship to themselves. Their design was to turnpirates and plunder the Spaniards which they could not do till theygot more men. But first they resolved to sell the goods in the shipand then go to Madagascar for recruits several among them having diedsince my confinement. They sailed many weeks and traded with theIndians but I knew not what course they took being kept a closeprisoner in my cabin and expecting nothing less than to be murderedas they often threatened me.Upon the th day of May one James Welch came down to my cabinand said he had orders from the captain to set me ashore. Iexpostulated with him but in vain neither would he so much as tell mewho their new captain was. They forced me into the longboat lettingme put on my best suit of clothes which were as good as new and takea small bundle of linen but no arms except my hanger and they wereso civil as not to search my pockets into which I conveyed what moneyI had with some other little necessaries. They rowed about a leagueand then set me down on a strand. I desired them to tell me whatcountry it was. They all swore they knew no more than myself butsaid that the captain as they called him was resolved after theyhad sold the lading to get rid of me in the first place where theycould discover land. They pushed off immediately advising me to makehaste for fear of being overtaken by the tide and so bade me farewell.In this desolate condition I advanced forward and soon got upon firmground where I sat down on a bank to rest myself and consider what Ihad best do. When I was a little refreshed I went up into the countryresolving to deliver myself to the first savages I should meet andpurchase my life from them by some bracelets glass rings and othertoys which sailors usually provide themselves with in those voyagesand whereof I had some about me. The land was divided by long rows oftrees not regularly planted but naturally growing there was greatplenty of grass and several fields of oats. I walked verycircumspectly for fear of being surprised or suddenly shot with anarrow from behind or on either side. I fell into a beaten road whereI saw many tracts of human feet and some of cows but most of horses.At last I beheld several animals in a field and one or two of the samekind sitting in trees. Their shape was very singular and deformedwhich a little discomposed me so that I lay down behind a thicket toobserve them better. Some of them coming forward near the place where Ilay gave me an opportunity of distinctly marking their form. Theirheads and breasts were covered with a thick hair some frizzled andothers lank they had beards like goats and a long ridge of hair downtheir backs and the fore parts of their legs and feet but the rest oftheir bodies was bare so that I might see their skins which were of abrown buff colour. They had no tails nor any hair at all on theirbuttocks except about the anus which I presume nature had placedthere to defend them as they sat on the ground for this posture theyused as well as lying down and often stood on their hind feet. Theyclimbed high trees as nimbly as a squirrel for they had strongextended claws before and behind terminating in sharp points andhooked. They would often spring and bound and leap with prodigiousagility. The females were not so large as the males they had long lankhair on their heads but none on their faces nor any thing more than asort of down on the rest of their bodies except about the anus andpudenda. The dugs hung between their forefeet and often reached almostto the ground as they walked. The hair of both sexes was of severalcolours brown red black and yellow. Upon the whole I never beheldin all my travels so disagreeable an animal or one against which Inaturally conceived so strong an antipathy. So that thinking I hadseen enough full of contempt and aversion I got up and pursued thebeaten road hoping it might direct me to the cabin of some Indian. Ihad not got far when I met one of these creatures full in my way andcoming up directly to me. The ugly monster when he saw me distortedseveral ways every feature of his visage and stared as at an objecthe had never seen before then approaching nearer lifted up hisforepaw whether out of curiosity or mischief I could not tell but Idrew my hanger and gave him a good blow with the flat side of it forI durst not strike with the edge fearing the inhabitants might beprovoked against me if they should come to know that I had killed ormaimed any of their cattle. When the beast felt the smart he drewback and roared so loud that a herd of at least forty came flockingabout me from the next field howling and making odious faces but Iran to the body of a tree and leaning my back against it kept themoff by waving my hanger. Several of this cursed brood getting hold ofthe branches behind leaped up into the tree whence they began todischarge their excrements on my head however I escaped pretty wellby sticking close to the stem of the tree but was almost stifled withthe filth which fell about me on every side.In the midst of this distress I observed them all to run away on asudden as fast as they could at which I ventured to leave the tree andpursue the road wondering what it was that could put them into thisfright. But looking on my left hand I saw a horse walking softly inthe field which my persecutors having sooner discovered was the causeof their flight. The horse started a little when he came near me butsoon recovering himself looked full in my face with manifest tokens ofwonder he viewed my hands and feet walking round me several times. Iwould have pursued my journey but he placed himself directly in theway yet looking with a very mild aspect never offering the leastviolence. We stood gazing at each other for some time at last I tookthe boldness to reach my hand towards his neck with a design to strokeit using the common style and whistle of jockeys when they are goingto handle a strange horse. But this animal seemed to receive mycivilities with disdain shook his head and bent his brows softlyraising up his right forefoot to remove my hand. Then he neighed threeor four times but in so different a cadence that I almost began tothink he was speaking to himself in some language of his own.While he and I were thus employed another horse came up who applyinghimself to the first in a very formal manner they gently struck eachothers right hoof before neighing several times by turns and varyingthe sound which seemed to be almost articulate. They went some pacesoff as if it were to confer together walking side by side backwardand forward like persons deliberating upon some affair of weight butoften turning their eyes towards me as it were to watch that I mightnot escape. I was amazed to see such actions and behaviour in brutebeasts and concluded with myself that if the inhabitants of thiscountry were endued with a proportionable degree of reason they mustneeds be the wisest people upon earth. This thought gave me so muchcomfort that I resolved to go forward until I could discover somehouse or village or meet with any of the natives leaving the twohorses to discourse together as they pleased. But the first who was adapple gray observing me to steal off neighed after me in soexpressive a tone that I fancied myself to understand what he meantwhereupon I turned back and came near to him to expect his farthercommands but concealing my fear as much as I could for I began to bein some pain how this adventure might terminate and the reader willeasily believe I did not much like my present situation.The two horses came up close to me looking with great earnestness uponmy face and hands. The gray steed rubbed my hat all round with hisright forehoof and discomposed it so much that I was forced to adjustit better by taking it off and settling it again whereat both he andhis companion who was a brown bay appeared to be much surprised thelatter felt the lappet of my coat and finding it to hang loose aboutme they both looked with new signs of wonder. He stroked my righthand seeming to admire the softness and colour but he squeezed it sohard between his hoof and his pastern that I was forced to roar afterwhich they both touched me with all possible tenderness. They wereunder great perplexity about my shoes and stockings which they feltvery often neighing to each other and using various gestures notunlike those of a philosopher when he would attempt to solve some newand difficult phenomenon.Upon the whole the behaviour of these animals was so orderly andrational so acute and judicious that I at last concluded they mustneeds be magicians who had thus metamorphosed themselves upon somedesign and seeing a stranger in the way resolved to divert themselveswith him or perhaps were really amazed at the sight of a man so verydifferent in habit feature and complexion from those who mightprobably live in so remote a climate. Upon the strength of thisreasoning I ventured to address them in the following mannerGentlemen if you be conjurers as I have good cause to believe youcan understand my language therefore I make bold to let your worshipsknow that I am a poor distressed Englishman driven by his misfortunesupon your coast and I entreat one of you to let me ride upon his backas if he were a real horse to some house or village where I can berelieved. In return of which favour I will make you a present of thisknife and bracelet taking them out of my pocket. The two creaturesstood silent while I spoke seeming to listen with great attention andwhen I had ended they neighed frequently towards each other as ifthey were engaged in serious conversation. I plainly observed thattheir language expressed the passions very well and the words mightwith little pains be resolved into an alphabet more easily than theChinese.I could frequently distinguish the word Yahoo which was repeated byeach of them several times and although it was impossible for me toconjecture what it meant yet while the two horses were busy inconversation I endeavoured to practise this word upon my tongue andas soon as they were silent I boldly pronounced Yahoo in a loudvoice imitating at the same time as near as I could the neighing ofa horse at which they were both visibly surprised and the grayrepeated the same word twice as if he meant to teach me the rightaccent wherein I spoke after him as well as I could and found myselfperceivably to improve every time though very far from any degree ofperfection. Then the bay tried me with a second word much harder to bepronounced but reducing it to the English orthography may be speltthus Houyhnhnm. I did not succeed in this so well as in the formerbut after two or three farther trials I had better fortune and theyboth appeared amazed at my capacity.After some further discourse which I then conjectured might relate tome the two friends took their leaves with the same compliment ofstriking each others hoof and the gray made me signs that I shouldwalk before him wherein I thought it prudent to comply till I couldfind a better director. When I offered to slacken my pace he would cryhhuun hhuun I guessed his meaning and gave him to understand aswell as I could that I was weary and not able to walk faster uponwhich he would stand a while to let me rest.CHAPTER II.The author conducted by a Houyhnhnm to his house. The house described.The authors reception. The food of the Houyhnhnms. The author indistress for want of meat is at last relieved. His manner of feedingin this country.Having travelled about three miles we came to a long kind of buildingmade of timber stuck in the ground and wattled across the roof waslow and covered with straw. I now began to be a little comforted andtook out some toys which travellers usually carry for presents to thesavage Indians of America and other parts in hopes the people of thehouse would be thereby encouraged to receive me kindly. The horse mademe a sign to go in first it was a large room with a smooth clay floorand a rack and manger extending the whole length on one side. Therewere three nags and two mares not eating but some of them sittingdown upon their hams which I very much wondered at but wondered moreto see the rest employed in domestic business these seemed butordinary cattle. However this confirmed my first opinion that apeople who could so far civilize brute animals must needs excel inwisdom all the nations of the world. The gray came in just after andthereby prevented any ill treatment which the others might have givenme. He neighed to them several times in a style of authority andreceived answers.Beyond this room there were three others reaching the length of thehouse to which you passed through three doors opposite to each otherin the manner of a vista. We went through the second room towards thethird. Here the gray walked in first beckoning me to attend I waitedin the second room and got ready my presents for the master andmistress of the house they were two knives three bracelets of falsepearls a small lookingglass and a bead necklace. The horse neighedthree or four times and I waited to hear some answers in a humanvoice but I heard no other returns than in the same dialect only oneor two a little shriller than his. I began to think that this housemust belong to some person of great note among them because thereappeared so much ceremony before I could gain admittance. But that aman of quality should be served all by horses was beyond mycomprehension. I feared my brain was disturbed by my sufferings andmisfortunes. I roused myself and looked about me in the room where Iwas left alone this was furnished like the first only after a moreelegant manner. I rubbed my eyes often but the same objects stilloccurred. I pinched my arms and sides to awake myself hoping I mightbe in a dream. I then absolutely concluded that all these appearancescould be nothing else but necromancy and magic. But I had no time topursue these reflections for the gray horse came to the door and mademe a sign to follow him into the third room where I saw a very comelymare together with a colt and foal sitting on their haunches uponmats of straw not unartfully made and perfectly neat and clean.The mare soon after my entrance rose from her mat and coming up closeafter having nicely observed my hands and face gave me a mostcontemptuous look and turning to the horse I heard the word Yahoooften repeated betwixt them the meaning of which word I could not thencomprehend although it was the first I had learned to pronounce. But Iwas soon better informed to my everlasting mortification for thehorse beckoning to me with his head and repeating the hhuunhhuun as he did upon the road which I understood was to attend himled me out into a kind of court where was another building at somedistance from the house. Here we entered and I saw three of thosedetestable creatures which I first met after my landing feeding uponroots and the flesh of some animals which I afterwards found to bethat of asses and dogs and now and then a cow dead by accident ordisease. They were all tied by the neck with strong withes fastened toa beam they held their food between the claws of their forefeet andtore it with their teeth.The master horse ordered a sorrel nag one of his servants to untiethe largest of these animals and take him into the yard. The beast andI were brought close together and by our countenances diligentlycompared both by master and servant who thereupon repeated severaltimes the word Yahoo. My horror and astonishment are not to bedescribed when I observed in this abominable animal a perfect humanfigure the face of it indeed was flat and broad the nose depressedthe lips large and the mouth wide but these differences are common toall savage nations where the lineaments of the countenance aredistorted by the natives suffering their infants to lie grovelling onthe earth or by carrying them on their backs nuzzling with their faceagainst the mothers shoulders. The forefeet of the Yahoo differedfrom my hands in nothing else but the length of the nails thecoarseness and brownness of the palms and the hairiness on the backs.There was the same resemblance between our feet with the samedifferences which I knew very well though the horses did not becauseof my shoes and stockings the same in every part of our bodies exceptas to hairiness and colour which I have already described.The great difficulty that seemed to stick with the two horses was tosee the rest of my body so very different from that of a Yahoo forwhich I was obliged to my clothes whereof they had no conception. Thesorrel nag offered me a root which he held after their manner as weshall describe in its proper place between his hoof and pastern Itook it in my hand and having smelt it returned it to him again ascivilly as I could. He brought out of the Yahoos kennel a piece ofasss flesh but it smelt so offensively that I turned from it withloathing he then threw it to the Yahoo by whom it was greedilydevoured. He afterwards showed me a wisp of hay and a fetlock full ofoats but I shook my head to signify that neither of these were foodfor me. And indeed I now apprehended that I must absolutely starve ifI did not get to some of my own species for as to those filthyYahoos although there were few greater lovers of mankind at thattime than myself yet I confess I never saw any sensitive being sodetestable on all accounts and the more I came near them the morehateful they grew while I stayed in that country. This the masterhorse observed by my behaviour and therefore sent the Yahoo back tohis kennel. He then put his forehoof to his mouth at which I was muchsurprised although he did it with ease and with a motion thatappeared perfectly natural and made other signs to know what I wouldeat but I could not return him such an answer as he was able toapprehend and if he had understood me I did not see how it waspossible to contrive any way for finding myself nourishment. While wewere thus engaged I observed a cow passing by whereupon I pointed toher and expressed a desire to go and milk her. This had its effectfor he led me back into the house and ordered a mareservant to open aroom where a good store of milk lay in earthen and wooden vesselsafter a very orderly and cleanly manner. She gave me a large bowlfulof which I drank very heartily and found myself well refreshed.About noon I saw coming towards the house a kind of vehicle drawn likea sledge by four Yahoos. There was in it an old steed who seemed tobe of quality he alighted with his hindfeet forward having byaccident got a hurt in his left forefoot. He came to dine with ourhorse who received him with great civility. They dined in the bestroom and had oats boiled in milk for the second course which the oldhorse ate warm but the rest cold. Their mangers were placed circularin the middle of the room and divided into several partitions roundwhich they sat on their haunches upon bosses of straw. In the middlewas a large rack with angles answering to every partition of themanger so that each horse and mare ate their own hay and their ownmash of oats and milk with much decency and regularity. The behaviourof the young colt and foal appeared very modest and that of the masterand mistress extremely cheerful and complaisant to their guest. Thegray ordered me to stand by him and much discourse passed between himand his friend concerning me as I found by the strangers oftenlooking on me and the frequent repetition of the word Yahoo.I happened to wear my gloves which the master gray observing seemedperplexed discovering signs of wonder what I had done to my forefeet.He put his hoof three or four times to them as if he would signifythat I should reduce them to their former shape which I presently didpulling off both my gloves and putting them into my pocket. Thisoccasioned farther talk and I saw the company was pleased with mybehaviour whereof I soon found the good effects. I was ordered tospeak the few words I understood and while they were at dinner themaster taught me the names for oats milk fire water and someothers which I could readily pronounce after him having from my youtha great facility in learning languages.When dinner was done the master horse took me aside and by signs andwords made me understand the concern he was in that I had nothing toeat. Oats in their tongue are called hlunnh. This word I pronouncedtwo or three times for although I had refused them at first yet uponsecond thoughts I considered that I could contrive to make of them akind of bread which might be sufficient with milk to keep me alivetill I could make my escape to some other country and to creatures ofmy own species. The horse immediately ordered a white mare servant ofhis family to bring me a good quantity of oats in a sort of woodentray. These I heated before the fire as well as I could and rubbedthem till the husks came off which I made a shift to winnow from thegrain. I ground and beat them between two stones then took water andmade them into a paste or cake which I toasted at the fire and eatwarm with milk. It was at first a very insipid diet though commonenough in many parts of Europe but grew tolerable by time and havingbeen often reduced to hard fare in my life this was not the firstexperiment I had made how easily nature is satisfied. And I cannot butobserve that I never had one hours sickness while I stayed in thisisland. It is true I sometimes made a shift to catch a rabbit orbird by springs made of Yahoos hairs and I often gatheredwholesome herbs which I boiled and ate as salads with my bread andnow and then for a rarity I made a little butter and drank the whey.I was at first at a great loss for salt but custom soon reconciled meto the want of it and I am confident that the frequent use of saltamong us is an effect of luxury and was first introduced only as aprovocative to drink except where it is necessary for preserving fleshin long voyages or in places remote from great markets for we observeno animal to be fond of it but man and as to myself when I left thiscountry it was a great while before I could endure the taste of it inanything that I ate.This is enough to say upon the subject of my diet wherewith othertravellers fill their books as if the readers were personallyconcerned whether we fare well or ill. However it was necessary tomention this matter lest the world should think it impossible that Icould find sustenance for three years in such a country and among suchinhabitants.When it grew towards evening the master horse ordered a place for meto lodge in it was but six yards from the house and separated from thestable of the Yahoos. Here I got some straw and covering myself withmy own clothes slept very sound. But I was in a short time betteraccommodated as the reader shall know hereafter when I come to treatmore particularly about my way of living.CHAPTER III.The author studies to learn the language. The Houyhnhnm his masterassists in teaching him. The language described. Several Houyhnhnms ofquality come out of curiosity to see the author. He gives his master ashort account of his voyage.My principal endeavour was to learn the language which my master forso I shall henceforth call him and his children and every servant ofhis house were desirous to teach me for they looked upon it as aprodigy that a brute animal should discover such marks of a rationalcreature. I pointed to every thing and inquired the name of it whichI wrote down in my journalbook when I was alone and corrected my badaccent by desiring those of the family to pronounce it often. In thisemployment a sorrel nag one of the underservants was very ready toassist me.In speaking they pronounced through the nose and throat and theirlanguage approaches nearest to the HighDutch or German of any I knowin Europe but is much more graceful and significant. The emperorCharles V. made almost the same observation when he said that if hewere to speak to his horse it should be in HighDutch.The curiosity and impatience of my master were so great that he spentmany hours of his leisure to instruct me. He was convinced as heafterwards told me that I must be a Yahoo but my teachablenesscivility and cleanliness astonished him which were qualitiesaltogether opposite to those animals. He was most perplexed about myclothes reasoning sometimes with himself whether they were a part ofmy body for I never pulled them off till the family were asleep andgot them on before they waked in the morning. My master was eager tolearn whence I came how I acquired those appearances of reason whichI discovered in all my actions and to know my story from my own mouthwhich he hoped he should soon do by the great proficiency I made inlearning and pronouncing their words and sentences. To help my memoryI formed all I learned into the English alphabet and writ the wordsdown with the translations. This last after some time I ventured todo in my masters presence. It cost me much trouble to explain to himwhat I was doing for the inhabitants have not the least idea of booksor literature.In about ten weeks time I was able to understand most of hisquestions and in three months could give him some tolerable answers.He was extremely curious to know from what part of the country I cameand how I was taught to imitate a rational creature because theYahoos whom he saw I exactly resembled in my head hands and facethat were only visible with some appearance of cunning and thestrongest disposition to mischief were observed to be the mostunteachable of all brutes. I answered that I came over the sea froma far place with many others of my own kind in a great hollow vesselmade of the bodies of trees that my companions forced me to land onthis coast and then left me to shift for myself. It was with somedifficulty and by the help of many signs that I brought him tounderstand me. He replied that I must needs be mistaken or that Isaid the thing which was not for they have no word in their languageto express lying or falsehood. He knew it was impossible that therecould be a country beyond the sea or that a parcel of brutes couldmove a wooden vessel whither they pleased upon water. He was sure noHouyhnhnm alive could make such a vessel nor would trust Yahoos tomanage it.The word Houyhnhnm in their tongue signifies a horse and in itsetymology the perfection of nature. I told my master that I was ata loss for expression but would improve as fast as I could and hopedin a short time I should be able to tell him wonders. He was pleasedto direct his own mare his colt and foal and the servants of thefamily to take all opportunities of instructing me and every day fortwo or three hours he was at the same pains himself. Several horsesand mares of quality in the neighbourhood came often to our house uponthe report spread of a wonderful Yahoo that could speak like aHouyhnhnm and seemed in his words and actions to discover someglimmerings of reason. These delighted to converse with me they putmany questions and received such answers as I was able to return. Byall these advantages I made so great a progress that in five monthsfrom my arrival I understood whatever was spoken and could expressmyself tolerably well.The Houyhnhnms who came to visit my master out of a design of seeingand talking with me could hardly believe me to be a right Yahoobecause my body had a different covering from others of my kind. Theywere astonished to observe me without the usual hair or skin except onmy head face and hands but I discovered that secret to my masterupon an accident which happened about a fortnight before.I have already told the reader that every night when the family weregone to bed it was my custom to strip and cover myself with myclothes. It happened one morning early that my master sent for me bythe sorrel nag who was his valet. When he came I was fast asleep myclothes fallen off on one side and my shirt above my waist. I awakedat the noise he made and observed him to deliver his message in somedisorder after which he went to my master and in a great fright gavehim a very confused account of what he had seen. This I presentlydiscovered for going as soon as I was dressed to pay my attendanceupon his honour he asked me the meaning of what his servant hadreported that I was not the same thing when I slept as I appeared tobe at other times that his valet assured him some part of me waswhite some yellow at least not so white and some brown.I had hitherto concealed the secret of my dress in order todistinguish myself as much as possible from that cursed race ofYahoos but now I found it in vain to do so any longer. Besides Iconsidered that my clothes and shoes would soon wear out which alreadywere in a declining condition and must be supplied by some contrivancefrom the hides of Yahoos or other brutes whereby the whole secretwould be known. I therefore told my master that in the country whenceI came those of my kind always covered their bodies with the hairs ofcertain animals prepared by art as well for decency as to avoid theinclemencies of air both hot and cold of which as to my own personI would give him immediate conviction if he pleased to command meonly desiring his excuse if I did not expose those parts that naturetaught us to conceal. He said my discourse was all very strange butespecially the last part for he could not understand why natureshould teach us to conceal what nature had given that neither himselfnor family were ashamed of any parts of their bodies but however Imight do as I pleased. Whereupon I first unbuttoned my coat andpulled it off. I did the same with my waistcoat. I drew off my shoesstockings and breeches. I let my shirt down to my waist and drew upthe bottom fastening it like a girdle about my middle to hide mynakedness.My master observed the whole performance with great signs of curiosityand admiration. He took up all my clothes in his pastern one pieceafter another and examined them diligently he then stroked my bodyvery gently and looked round me several times after which he saidit was plain I must be a perfect Yahoo but that I differed very muchfrom the rest of my species in the softness whiteness and smoothnessof my skin my want of hair in several parts of my body the shape andshortness of my claws behind and before and my affectation of walkingcontinually on my two hinder feet. He desired to see no more and gaveme leave to put on my clothes again for I was shuddering with cold.I expressed my uneasiness at his giving me so often the appellation ofYahoo an odious animal for which I had so utter a hatred andcontempt I begged he would forbear applying that word to me and makethe same order in his family and among his friends whom he suffered tosee me. I requested likewise that the secret of my having a falsecovering to my body might be known to none but himself at least aslong as my present clothing should last for as to what the sorrel naghis valet had observed his honour might command him to conceal it.All this my master very graciously consented to and thus the secretwas kept till my clothes began to wear out which I was forced tosupply by several contrivances that shall hereafter be mentioned. Inthe meantime he desired I would go on with my utmost diligence tolearn their language because he was more astonished at my capacity forspeech and reason than at the figure of my body whether it werecovered or not adding that he waited with some impatience to hearthe wonders which I promised to tell him.From thenceforward he doubled the pains he had been at to instruct mehe brought me into all company and made them treat me with civilitybecause as he told them privately this would put me into goodhumour and make me more diverting.Every day when I waited on him beside the trouble he was at inteaching he would ask me several questions concerning myself which Ianswered as well as I could and by these means he had already receivedsome general ideas though very imperfect. It would be tedious torelate the several steps by which I advanced to a more regularconversation but the first account I gave of myself in any order andlength was to this purposeThat I came from a very far country as I already had attempted totell him with about fifty more of my own species that we travelledupon the seas in a great hollow vessel made of wood and larger thanhis honours house. I described the ship to him in the best terms Icould and explained by the help of my handkerchief displayed how itwas driven forward by the wind. That upon a quarrel among us I was seton shore on this coast where I walked forward without knowingwhither till he delivered me from the persecution of those execrableYahoos. He asked me who made the ship and how it was possiblethat the Houyhnhnms of my country would leave it to the management ofbrutes My answer was that I durst proceed no further in myrelation unless he would give me his word and honour that he would notbe offended and then I would tell him the wonders I had so oftenpromised. He agreed and I went on by assuring him that the ship wasmade by creatures like myself who in all the countries I hadtravelled as well as in my own were the only governing rationalanimals and that upon my arrival hither I was as much astonished tosee the Houyhnhnms act like rational beings as he or his friendscould be in finding some marks of reason in a creature he was pleasedto call a Yahoo to which I owned my resemblance in every part butcould not account for their degenerate and brutal nature. I saidfarther that if good fortune ever restored me to my native countryto relate my travels hither as I resolved to do everybody wouldbelieve that I said the thing that was not that I invented the storyout of my own head and with all possible respect to himself hisfamily and friends and under his promise of not being offended ourcountrymen would hardly think it probable that a Houyhnhnm should bethe presiding creature of a nation and a Yahoo the brute.CHAPTER IV.The Houyhnhnms notion of truth and falsehood. The authors discoursedisapproved by his master. The author gives a more particular accountof himself and the accidents of his voyage.My master heard me with great appearances of uneasiness in hiscountenance because doubting or not believing are so little knownin this country that the inhabitants cannot tell how to behavethemselves under such circumstances. And I remember in frequentdiscourses with my master concerning the nature of manhood in otherparts of the world having occasion to talk of lying and falserepresentation it was with much difficulty that he comprehended whatI meant although he had otherwise a most acute judgment. For he arguedthus that the use of speech was to make us understand one anotherand to receive information of facts now if any one said the thingwhich was not these ends were defeated because I cannot properly besaid to understand him and I am so far from receiving informationthat he leaves me worse than in ignorance for I am led to believe athing black when it is white and short when it is long. And thesewere all the notions he had concerning that faculty of lying soperfectly well understood and so universally practised among humancreatures.To return from this digression. When I asserted that the Yahoos werethe only governing animals in my country which my master said wasaltogether past his conception he desired to know whether we hadHouyhnhnms among us and what was their employment I told him wehad great numbers that in summer they grazed in the fields and inwinter were kept in houses with hay and oats where Yahoo servantswere employed to rub their skins smooth comb their manes pick theirfeet serve them with food and make their beds. I understand youwell said my master it is now very plain from all you have spokenthat whatever share of reason the Yahoos pretend to the Houyhnhnmsare your masters I heartily wish our Yahoos would be so tractable.I begged his honour would please to excuse me from proceeding anyfurther because I was very certain that the account he expected fromme would be highly displeasing. But he insisted in commanding me tolet him know the best and the worst. I told him he should be obeyed.I owned that the Houyhnhnms among us whom we called horses werethe most generous and comely animals we had that they excelled instrength and swiftness and when they belonged to persons of qualitywere employed in travelling racing or drawing chariots they weretreated with much kindness and care till they fell into diseases orbecame foundered in the feet but then they were sold and used to allkind of drudgery till they died after which their skins were strippedand sold for what they were worth and their bodies left to be devouredby dogs and birds of prey. But the common race of horses had not sogood fortune being kept by farmers and carriers and other meanpeople who put them to greater labour and fed them worse. Idescribed as well as I could our way of riding the shape and use ofa bridle a saddle a spur and a whip of harness and wheels. I addedthat we fastened plates of a certain hard substance called iron atthe bottom of their feet to preserve their hoofs from being broken bythe stony ways on which we often travelled.My master after some expressions of great indignation wondered howwe dared to venture upon a Houyhnhnms back for he was sure thatthe weakest servant in his house would be able to shake off thestrongest Yahoo or by lying down and rolling on his back squeezethe brute to death. I answered that our horses were trained up fromthree or four years old to the several uses we intended them for thatif any of them proved intolerably vicious they were employed forcarriages that they were severely beaten while they were young forany mischievous tricks that the males designed for the common use ofriding or draught were generally castrated about two years after theirbirth to take down their spirits and make them more tame and gentlethat they were indeed sensible of rewards and punishments but hishonour would please to consider that they had not the least tinctureof reason any more than the Yahoos in this country.It put me to the pains of many circumlocutions to give my master aright idea of what I spoke for their language does not abound invariety of words because their wants and passions are fewer than amongus. But it is impossible to express his noble resentment at our savagetreatment of the Houyhnhnm race particularly after I had explainedthe manner and use of castrating horses among us to hinder them frompropagating their kind and to render them more servile. He said ifit were possible there could be any country where Yahoos alone wereendued with reason they certainly must be the governing animalbecause reason in time will always prevail against brutal strength.But considering the frame of our bodies and especially of mine hethought no creature of equal bulk was so illcontrived for employingthat reason in the common offices of life whereupon he desired toknow whether those among whom I lived resembled me or the Yahoos ofhis country I assured him that I was as well shaped as most of myage but the younger and the females were much more soft and tenderand the skins of the latter generally as white as milk. He said Idiffered indeed from other Yahoos being much more cleanly and notaltogether so deformed but in point of real advantage he thought Idiffered for the worse that my nails were of no use either to my foreor hinder feet as to my forefeet he could not properly call them bythat name for he never observed me to walk upon them that they weretoo soft to bear the ground that I generally went with them uncoveredneither was the covering I sometimes wore on them of the same shape orso strong as that on my feet behind that I could not walk with anysecurity for if either of my hinder feet slipped I must inevitablyfall. He then began to find fault with other parts of my body theflatness of my face the prominence of my nose my eyes placed directlyin front so that I could not look on either side without turning myhead that I was not able to feed myself without lifting one of myforefeet to my mouth and therefore nature had placed those joints toanswer that necessity. He knew not what could be the use of thoseseveral clefts and divisions in my feet behind that these were toosoft to bear the hardness and sharpness of stones without a coveringmade from the skin of some other brute that my whole body wanted afence against heat and cold which I was forced to put on and off everyday with tediousness and trouble and lastly that he observed everyanimal in this country naturally to abhor the Yahoos whom the weakeravoided and the stronger drove from them. So that supposing us tohave the gift of reason he could not see how it were possible to curethat natural antipathy which every creature discovered against us norconsequently how we could tame and render them serviceable. However hewould as he said debate the matter no farther because he was moredesirous to know my own story the country where I was born and theseveral actions and events of my life before I came hither.I assured him how extremely desirous I was that he should besatisfied on every point but I doubted much whether it would bepossible for me to explain myself on several subjects whereof hishonour could have no conception because I saw nothing in his countryto which I could resemble them that however I would do my best andstrive to express myself by similitudes humbly desiring his assistancewhen I wanted proper words which he was pleased to promise me.I said my birth was of honest parents in an island called Englandwhich was remote from his country as many days journey as thestrongest of his honours servants could travel in the annual course ofthe sun that I was bred a surgeon whose trade it is to cure woundsand hurts in the body gotten by accident or violence that my countrywas governed by a female man whom we called queen that I left it toget riches whereby I might maintain myself and family when I shouldreturn that in my last voyage I was commander of the ship and hadabout fifty Yahoos under me many of which died at sea and I wasforced to supply them by others picked out from several nations thatour ship was twice in danger of being sunk the first time by a greatstorm and the second by striking against a rock. Here my masterinterposed by asking me how I could persuade strangers out ofdifferent countries to venture with me after the losses I hadsustained and the hazards I had run I said they were fellows ofdesperate fortunes forced to fly from the places of their birth onaccount of their poverty or their crimes. Some were undone by lawsuitsothers spent all they had in drinking whoring and gaming others fledfor treason many for murder theft poisoning robbery perjuryforgery coining false money for committing rapes or sodomy forflying from their colours or deserting to the enemy and most of themhad broken prison none of these durst return to their nativecountries for fear of being hanged or of starving in a jail andtherefore they were under the necessity of seeking a livelihood inother places.During this discourse my master was pleased to interrupt me severaltimes. I had made use of many circumlocutions in describing to him thenature of the several crimes for which most of our crew had been forcedto fly their country. This labour took up several days conversationbefore he was able to comprehend me. He was wholly at a loss to knowwhat could be the use or necessity of practising those vices. To clearup which I endeavoured to give some ideas of the desire of power andriches of the terrible effects of lust intemperance malice andenvy. All this I was forced to define and describe by putting cases andmaking suppositions. After which like one whose imagination was struckwith something never seen or heard of before he would lift up his eyeswith amazement and indignation. Power government war lawpunishment and a thousand other things had no terms wherein thatlanguage could express them which made the difficulty almostinsuperable to give my master any conception of what I meant. Butbeing of an excellent understanding much improved by contemplation andconverse he at last arrived at a competent knowledge of what humannature in our parts of the world is capable to perform and desired Iwould give him some particular account of that land which we callEurope but especially of my own country.CHAPTER V.The author at his masters command informs him of the state ofEngland. The causes of war among the princes of Europe. The authorbegins to explain the English constitution.The reader may please to observe that the following extract of manyconversations I had with my master contains a summary of the mostmaterial points which were discoursed at several times for above twoyears his honour often desiring fuller satisfaction as I fartherimproved in the Houyhnhnm tongue. I laid before him as well as Icould the whole state of Europe I discoursed of trade andmanufactures of arts and sciences and the answers I gave to all thequestions he made as they arose upon several subjects were a fund ofconversation not to be exhausted. But I shall here only set down thesubstance of what passed between us concerning my own country reducingit in order as well as I can without any regard to time or othercircumstances while I strictly adhere to truth. My only concern isthat I shall hardly be able to do justice to my masters arguments andexpressions which must needs suffer by my want of capacity as well asby a translation into our barbarous English.In obedience therefore to his honours commands I related to him theRevolution under the Prince of Orange the long war with Franceentered into by the said prince and renewed by his successor thepresent queen wherein the greatest powers of Christendom were engagedand which still continued I computed at his request that about amillion of Yahoos might have been killed in the whole progress of itand perhaps a hundred or more cities taken and five times as manyships burnt or sunk.He asked me what were the usual causes or motives that made onecountry go to war with another I answered they were innumerable butI should only mention a few of the chief. Sometimes the ambition ofprinces who never think they have land or people enough to governsometimes the corruption of ministers who engage their master in awar in order to stifle or divert the clamour of the subjects againsttheir evil administration. Difference in opinions has cost manymillions of lives for instance whether flesh be bread or bread beflesh whether the juice of a certain berry be blood or wine whetherwhistling be a vice or a virtue whether it be better to kiss a postor throw it into the fire what is the best colour for a coat whetherblack white red or gray and whether it should be long or shortnarrow or wide dirty or clean with many more. Neither are any wars sofurious and bloody or of so long a continuance as those occasioned bydifference in opinion especially if it be in things indifferent.Sometimes the quarrel between two princes is to decide which of themshall dispossess a third of his dominions where neither of thempretend to any right. Sometimes one prince quarrels with another forfear the other should quarrel with him. Sometimes a war is enteredupon because the enemy is too strong and sometimes because he is tooweak. Sometimes our neighbours want the things which we have or havethe things which we want and we both fight till they take ours orgive us theirs. It is a very justifiable cause of a war to invade acountry after the people have been wasted by famine destroyed bypestilence or embroiled by factions among themselves. It isjustifiable to enter into war against our nearest ally when one of histowns lies convenient for us or a territory of land that would renderour dominions round and complete. If a prince sends forces into anation where the people are poor and ignorant he may lawfully puthalf of them to death and make slaves of the rest in order tocivilize and reduce them from their barbarous way of living. It is avery kingly honourable and frequent practice when one prince desiresthe assistance of another to secure him against an invasion that theassistant when he has driven out the invader should seize on thedominions himself and kill imprison or banish the prince he came torelieve. Alliance by blood or marriage is a frequent cause of warbetween princes and the nearer the kindred is the greater theirdisposition to quarrel poor nations are hungry and rich nations areproud and pride and hunger will ever be at variance. For thesereasons the trade of a soldier is held the most honourable of allothers because a soldier is a Yahoo hired to kill in cold blood asmany of his own species who have never offended him as possibly hecan.There is likewise a kind of beggarly princes in Europe not able tomake war by themselves who hire out their troops to richer nationsfor so much a day to each man of which they keep threefourths tothemselves and it is the best part of their maintenance such arethose in many northern parts of Europe.What you have told me said my master upon the subject of war doesindeed discover most admirably the effects of that reason you pretendto however it is happy that the shame is greater than the danger andthat nature has left you utterly incapable of doing much mischief. Foryour mouths lying flat with your faces you can hardly bite each otherto any purpose unless by consent. Then as to the claws upon your feetbefore and behind they are so short and tender that one of ourYahoos would drive a dozen of yours before him. And therefore inrecounting the numbers of those who have been killed in battle Icannot but think you have said the thing which is not.I could not forbear shaking my head and smiling a little at hisignorance. And being no stranger to the art of war I gave him adescription of cannons culverins muskets carabines pistolsbullets powder swords bayonets battles sieges retreats attacksundermines countermines bombardments sea fights ships sunk with athousand men twenty thousand killed on each side dying groans limbsflying in the air smoke noise confusion trampling to death underhorses feet flight pursuit victory fields strewed with carcasesleft for food to dogs and wolves and birds of prey plunderingstripping ravishing burning and destroying. And to set forth thevalour of my own dear countrymen I assured him that I had seen themblow up a hundred enemies at once in a siege and as many in a shipand beheld the dead bodies drop down in pieces from the clouds to thegreat diversion of the spectators.I was going on to more particulars when my master commanded mesilence. He said whoever understood the nature of Yahoos mighteasily believe it possible for so vile an animal to be capable of everyaction I had named if their strength and cunning equalled theirmalice. But as my discourse had increased his abhorrence of the wholespecies so he found it gave him a disturbance in his mind to which hewas wholly a stranger before. He thought his ears being used to suchabominable words might by degrees admit them with less detestationthat although he hated the Yahoos of this country yet he no moreblamed them for their odious qualities than he did a gnnayh a birdof prey for its cruelty or a sharp stone for cutting his hoof. Butwhen a creature pretending to reason could be capable of suchenormities he dreaded lest the corruption of that faculty might beworse than brutality itself. He seemed therefore confident thatinstead of reason we were only possessed of some quality fitted toincrease our natural vices as the reflection from a troubled streamreturns the image of an illshapen body not only larger but moredistorted.He added that he had heard too much upon the subject of war both inthis and some former discourses. There was another point which alittle perplexed him at present. I had informed him that some of ourcrew left their country on account of being ruined by law that I hadalready explained the meaning of the word but he was at a loss how itshould come to pass that the law which was intended for every manspreservation should be any mans ruin. Therefore he desired to befurther satisfied what I meant by law and the dispensers thereofaccording to the present practice in my own country because he thoughtnature and reason were sufficient guides for a reasonable animal as wepretended to be in showing us what we ought to do and what to avoid.I assured his honour that law was a science in which I had not muchconversed further than by employing advocates in vain upon someinjustices that had been done me however I would give him all thesatisfaction I was able.I said there was a society of men among us bred up from their youthin the art of proving by words multiplied for the purpose that whiteis black and black is white according as they are paid. To thissociety all the rest of the people are slaves. For example if myneighbour has a mind to my cow he has a lawyer to prove that he oughtto have my cow from me. I must then hire another to defend my right itbeing against all rules of law that any man should be allowed to speakfor himself. Now in this case I who am the right owner lie undertwo great disadvantages first my lawyer being practised almost fromhis cradle in defending falsehood is quite out of his element when hewould be an advocate for justice which is an unnatural office healways attempts with great awkwardness if not with illwill. Thesecond disadvantage is that my lawyer must proceed with great cautionor else he will be reprimanded by the judges and abhorred by hisbrethren as one that would lessen the practice of the law. Andtherefore I have but two methods to preserve my cow. The first is togain over my adversarys lawyer with a double fee who will then betrayhis client by insinuating that he hath justice on his side. The secondway is for my lawyer to make my cause appear as unjust as he can byallowing the cow to belong to my adversary and this if it beskilfully done will certainly bespeak the favour of the bench. Nowyour honour is to know that these judges are persons appointed todecide all controversies of property as well as for the trial ofcriminals and picked out from the most dexterous lawyers who aregrown old or lazy and having been biassed all their lives againsttruth and equity lie under such a fatal necessity of favouring fraudperjury and oppression that I have known some of them refuse a largebribe from the side where justice lay rather than injure the facultyby doing any thing unbecoming their nature or their office.It is a maxim among these lawyers that whatever has been done beforemay legally be done again and therefore they take special care torecord all the decisions formerly made against common justice and thegeneral reason of mankind. These under the name of precedents theyproduce as authorities to justify the most iniquitous opinions and thejudges never fail of directing accordingly.In pleading they studiously avoid entering into the merits of thecause but are loud violent and tedious in dwelling upon allcircumstances which are not to the purpose. For instance in the casealready mentioned they never desire to know what claim or title myadversary has to my cow but whether the said cow were red or blackher horns long or short whether the field I graze her in be round orsquare whether she was milked at home or abroad what diseases she issubject to and the like after which they consult precedents adjournthe cause from time to time and in ten twenty or thirty years cometo an issue.It is likewise to be observed that this society has a peculiar cantand jargon of their own that no other mortal can understand andwherein all their laws are written which they take special care tomultiply whereby they have wholly confounded the very essence of truthand falsehood of right and wrong so that it will take thirty years todecide whether the field left me by my ancestors for six generationsbelongs to me or to a stranger three hundred miles off.In the trial of persons accused for crimes against the state themethod is much more short and commendable the judge first sends tosound the disposition of those in power after which he can easily hangor save a criminal strictly preserving all due forms of law.Here my master interposing said it was a pity that creaturesendowed with such prodigious abilities of mind as these lawyers bythe description I gave of them must certainly be were not ratherencouraged to be instructors of others in wisdom and knowledge. Inanswer to which I assured his honour that in all points out of theirown trade they were usually the most ignorant and stupid generationamong us the most despicable in common conversation avowed enemies toall knowledge and learning and equally disposed to pervert the generalreason of mankind in every other subject of discourse as in that oftheir own profession.CHAPTER VI.A continuation of the state of England under Queen Anne. The characterof a first minister of state in European courts.My master was yet wholly at a loss to understand what motives couldincite this race of lawyers to perplex disquiet and weary themselvesand engage in a confederacy of injustice merely for the sake ofinjuring their fellowanimals neither could he comprehend what I meantin saying they did it for hire. Whereupon I was at much pains todescribe to him the use of money the materials it was made of and thevalue of the metals that when a Yahoo had got a great store of thisprecious substance he was able to purchase whatever he had a mind tothe finest clothing the noblest houses great tracts of land the mostcostly meats and drinks and have his choice of the most beautifulfemales. Therefore since money alone was able to perform all thesefeats our Yahoos thought they could never have enough of it tospend or to save as they found themselves inclined from theirnatural bent either to profusion or avarice that the rich man enjoyedthe fruit of the poor mans labour and the latter were a thousand toone in proportion to the former that the bulk of our people wereforced to live miserably by labouring every day for small wages tomake a few live plentifully.I enlarged myself much on these and many other particulars to the samepurpose but his honour was still to seek for he went upon asupposition that all animals had a title to their share in theproductions of the earth and especially those who presided over therest. Therefore he desired I would let him know what these costlymeats were and how any of us happened to want them Whereupon Ienumerated as many sorts as came into my head with the various methodsof dressing them which could not be done without sending vessels bysea to every part of the world as well for liquors to drink as forsauces and innumerable other conveniences. I assured him that thiswhole globe of earth must be at least three times gone round before oneof our better female Yahoos could get her breakfast or a cup to putit in. He said that must needs be a miserable country which cannotfurnish food for its own inhabitants. But what he chiefly wondered atwas how such vast tracts of ground as I described should be whollywithout fresh water and the people put to the necessity of sendingover the sea for drink. I replied that England the dear place of mynativity was computed to produce three times the quantity of food morethan its inhabitants are able to consume as well as liquors extractedfrom grain or pressed out of the fruit of certain trees which madeexcellent drink and the same proportion in every other convenience oflife. But in order to feed the luxury and intemperance of the malesand the vanity of the females we sent away the greatest part of ournecessary things to other countries whence in return we brought thematerials of diseases folly and vice to spend among ourselves. Henceit follows of necessity that vast numbers of our people are compelledto seek their livelihood by begging robbing stealing cheatingpimping flattering suborning forswearing forging gaming lyingfawning hectoring voting scribbling stargazing poisoningwhoring canting libelling freethinking and the like occupationsevery one of which terms I was at much pains to make him understand.That wine was not imported among us from foreign countries to supplythe want of water or other drinks but because it was a sort of liquidwhich made us merry by putting us out of our senses diverted allmelancholy thoughts begat wild extravagant imaginations in the brainraised our hopes and banished our fears suspended every office ofreason for a time and deprived us of the use of our limbs till wefell into a profound sleep although it must be confessed that wealways awaked sick and dispirited and that the use of this liquorfilled us with diseases which made our lives uncomfortable and short.But beside all this the bulk of our people supported themselves byfurnishing the necessities or conveniences of life to the rich and toeach other. For instance when I am at home and dressed as I ought tobe I carry on my body the workmanship of a hundred tradesmen thebuilding and furniture of my house employ as many more and five timesthe number to adorn my wife.I was going on to tell him of another sort of people who get theirlivelihood by attending the sick having upon some occasions informedhis honour that many of my crew had died of diseases. But here it waswith the utmost difficulty that I brought him to apprehend what Imeant. He could easily conceive that a Houyhnhnm grew weak andheavy a few days before his death or by some accident might hurt alimb but that nature who works all things to perfection shouldsuffer any pains to breed in our bodies he thought impossible anddesired to know the reason of so unaccountable an evil.I told him we fed on a thousand things which operated contrary to eachother that we ate when we were not hungry and drank without theprovocation of thirst that we sat whole nights drinking strongliquors without eating a bit which disposed us to sloth inflamed ourbodies and precipitated or prevented digestion that prostitute femaleYahoos acquired a certain malady which bred rottenness in the bonesof those who fell into their embraces that this and many otherdiseases were propagated from father to son so that great numberscame into the world with complicated maladies upon them that it wouldbe endless to give him a catalogue of all diseases incident to humanbodies for they would not be fewer than five or six hundred spreadover every limb and jointin short every part external and intestinehaving diseases appropriated to itself. To remedy which there was asort of people bred up among us in the profession or pretence ofcuring the sick. And because I had some skill in the faculty I wouldin gratitude to his honour let him know the whole mystery and methodby which they proceed.Their fundamental is that all diseases arise from repletion whencethey conclude that a great evacuation of the body is necessary eitherthrough the natural passage or upwards at the mouth. Their nextbusiness is from herbs minerals gums oils shells salts juicesseaweed excrements barks of trees serpents toads frogs spidersdead mens flesh and bones birds beasts and fishes to form acomposition for smell and taste the most abominable nauseous anddetestable they can possibly contrive which the stomach immediatelyrejects with loathing and this they call a vomit or else from thesame storehouse with some other poisonous additions they command usto take in at the orifice above or below just as the physician thenhappens to be disposed a medicine equally annoying and disgustful tothe bowels which relaxing the belly drives down all before it andthis they call a purge or a clyster. For nature as the physiciansallege having intended the superior anterior orifice only for theintromission of solids and liquids and the inferior posterior forejection these artists ingeniously considering that in all diseasesnature is forced out of her seat therefore to replace her in it thebody must be treated in a manner directly contrary by interchangingthe use of each orifice forcing solids and liquids in at the anus andmaking evacuations at the mouth.But besides real diseases we are subject to many that are onlyimaginary for which the physicians have invented imaginary curesthese have their several names and so have the drugs that are properfor them and with these our female Yahoos are always infested.One great excellency in this tribe is their skill at prognosticswherein they seldom fail their predictions in real diseases when theyrise to any degree of malignity generally portending death which isalways in their power when recovery is not and therefore upon anyunexpected signs of amendment after they have pronounced theirsentence rather than be accused as false prophets they know how toapprove their sagacity to the world by a seasonable dose.They are likewise of special use to husbands and wives who are grownweary of their mates to eldest sons to great ministers of state andoften to princes.I had formerly upon occasion discoursed with my master upon thenature of government in general and particularly of our own excellentconstitution deservedly the wonder and envy of the whole world. Buthaving here accidentally mentioned a minister of state he commandedme some time after to inform him what species of Yahoo Iparticularly meant by that appellation.I told him that a first or chief minister of state who was theperson I intended to describe was the creature wholly exempt from joyand grief love and hatred pity and anger at least makes use of noother passions but a violent desire of wealth power and titles thathe applies his words to all uses except to the indication of his mindthat he never tells a truth but with an intent that you should take itfor a lie nor a lie but with a design that you should take it for atruth that those he speaks worst of behind their backs are in thesurest way of preferment and whenever he begins to praise you toothers or to yourself you are from that day forlorn. The worst markyou can receive is a promise especially when it is confirmed with anoath after which every wise man retires and gives over all hopes.There are three methods by which a man may rise to be chief minister.The first is by knowing how with prudence to dispose of a wife adaughter or a sister the second by betraying or undermining hispredecessor and the third is by a furious zeal in public assembliesagainst the corruptions of the court. But a wise prince would ratherchoose to employ those who practise the last of these methods becausesuch zealots prove always the most obsequious and subservient to thewill and passions of their master. That these ministers having allemployments at their disposal preserve themselves in power by bribingthe majority of a senate or great council and at last by anexpedient called an act of indemnity whereof I described the natureto him they secure themselves from afterreckonings and retire fromthe public laden with the spoils of the nation.The palace of a chief minister is a seminary to breed up others in hisown trade the pages lackeys and porters by imitating their masterbecome ministers of state in their several districts and learn toexcel in the three principal ingredients of insolence lying andbribery. Accordingly they have a subaltern court paid to them bypersons of the best rank and sometimes by the force of dexterity andimpudence arrive through several gradations to be successors totheir lord.He is usually governed by a decayed wench or favourite footman whoare the tunnels through which all graces are conveyed and may properlybe called in the last resort the governors of the kingdom.One day in discourse my master having heard me mention the nobilityof my country was pleased to make me a compliment which I could notpretend to deserve that he was sure I must have been born of somenoble family because I far exceeded in shape colour and cleanlinessall the Yahoos of his nation although I seemed to fail in strengthand agility which must be imputed to my different way of living fromthose other brutes and besides I was not only endowed with the facultyof speech but likewise with some rudiments of reason to a degreethat with all his acquaintance I passed for a prodigy.He made me observe that among the Houyhnhnms the white thesorrel and the irongray were not so exactly shaped as the bay thedapplegray and the black nor born with equal talents of mind or acapacity to improve them and therefore continued always in thecondition of servants without ever aspiring to match out of their ownrace which in that country would be reckoned monstrous and unnatural.I made his honour my most humble acknowledgments for the good opinionhe was pleased to conceive of me but assured him at the same timethat my birth was of the lower sort having been born of plain honestparents who were just able to give me a tolerable education thatnobility among us was altogether a different thing from the idea hehad of it that our young noblemen are bred from their childhood inidleness and luxury that as soon as years will permit they consumetheir vigour and contract odious diseases among lewd females and whentheir fortunes are almost ruined they marry some woman of mean birthdisagreeable person and unsound constitution merely for the sake ofmoney whom they hate and despise. That the productions of suchmarriages are generally scrofulous rickety or deformed children bywhich means the family seldom continues above three generations unlessthe wife takes care to provide a healthy father among her neighboursor domestics in order to improve and continue the breed. That a weakdiseased body a meagre countenance and sallow complexion are thetrue marks of noble blood and a healthy robust appearance is sodisgraceful in a man of quality that the world concludes his realfather to have been a groom or a coachman. The imperfections of hismind run parallel with those of his body being a composition ofspleen dullness ignorance caprice sensuality and pride.Without the consent of this illustrious body no law can be enactedrepealed or altered and these nobles have likewise the decision ofall our possessions without appeal. CHAPTER VII.The authors great love of his native country. His mastersobservations upon the constitution and administration of England asdescribed by the author with parallel cases and comparisons. Hismasters observations upon human nature.The reader may be disposed to wonder how I could prevail on myself togive so free a representation of my own species among a race ofmortals who are already too apt to conceive the vilest opinion ofhumankind from that entire congruity between me and their Yahoos.But I must freely confess that the many virtues of those excellentquadrupeds placed in opposite view to human corruptions had so faropened my eyes and enlarged my understanding that I began to view theactions and passions of man in a very different light and to think thehonour of my own kind not worth managing which besides it wasimpossible for me to do before a person of so acute a judgment as mymaster who daily convinced me of a thousand faults in myself whereofI had not the least perception before and which with us would neverbe numbered even among human infirmities. I had likewise learned fromhis example an utter detestation of all falsehood or disguise andtruth appeared so amiable to me that I determined upon sacrificingevery thing to it.Let me deal so candidly with the reader as to confess that there wasyet a much stronger motive for the freedom I took in my representationof things. I had not yet been a year in this country before Icontracted such a love and veneration for the inhabitants that Ientered on a firm resolution never to return to humankind but to passthe rest of my life among these admirable Houyhnhnms in thecontemplation and practice of every virtue where I could have noexample or incitement to vice. But it was decreed by fortune myperpetual enemy that so great a felicity should not fall to my share.However it is now some comfort to reflect that in what I said of mycountrymen I extenuated their faults as much as I durst before sostrict an examiner and upon every article gave as favourable a turn asthe matter would bear. For indeed who is there alive that will not beswayed by his bias and partiality to the place of his birthI have related the substance of several conversations I had with mymaster during the greatest part of the time I had the honour to be inhis service but have indeed for brevity sake omitted much more thanis here set down.When I had answered all his questions and his curiosity seemed to befully satisfied he sent for me one morning early and commanded me tosit down at some distance an honour which he had never beforeconferred upon me. He said he had been very seriously considering mywhole story as far as it related both to myself and my country thathe looked upon us as a sort of animals to whose share by whataccident he could not conjecture some small pittance of reason hadfallen whereof we made no other use than by its assistance toaggravate our natural corruptions and to acquire new ones whichnature had not given us that we disarmed ourselves of the fewabilities she had bestowed had been very successful in multiplying ouroriginal wants and seemed to spend our whole lives in vain endeavoursto supply them by our own inventions that as to myself it wasmanifest I had neither the strength nor agility of a common Yahoothat I walked infirmly on my hinder feet had found out a contrivanceto make my claws of no use or defence and to remove the hair from mychin which was intended as a shelter from the sun and the weatherlastly that I could neither run with speed nor climb trees like mybrethren as he called them the Yahoos in his country.That our institutions of government and law were plainly owing to ourgross defects in reason and by consequence in virtue because reasonalone is sufficient to govern a rational creature which wastherefore a character we had no pretence to challenge even from theaccount I had given of my own people although he manifestly perceivedthat in order to favour them I had concealed many particulars andoften said the thing which was not.He was the more confirmed in this opinion because he observed thatas I agreed in every feature of my body with other Yahoos exceptwhere it was to my real disadvantage in point of strength speed andactivity the shortness of my claws and some other particulars wherenature had no part so from the representation I had given him of ourlives our manners and our actions he found as near a resemblance inthe disposition of our minds. He said the Yahoos were known tohate one another more than they did any different species of animalsand the reason usually assigned was the odiousness of their ownshapes which all could see in the rest but not in themselves. He hadtherefore begun to think it not unwise in us to cover our bodies andby that invention conceal many of our deformities from each otherwhich would else be hardly supportable. But he now found he had beenmistaken and that the dissensions of those brutes in his country wereowing to the same cause with ours as I had described them. For ifsaid he you throw among five Yahoos as much food as would besufficient for fifty they will instead of eating peaceably falltogether by the ears each single one impatient to have all to itselfand therefore a servant was usually employed to stand by while theywere feeding abroad and those kept at home were tied at a distancefrom each other that if a cow died of age or accident before aHouyhnhnm could secure it for his own Yahoos those in theneighbourhood would come in herds to seize it and then would ensuesuch a battle as I had described with terrible wounds made by theirclaws on both sides although they seldom were able to kill oneanother for want of such convenient instruments of death as we hadinvented. At other times the like battles have been fought between theYahoos of several neighbourhoods without any visible cause those ofone district watching all opportunities to surprise the next beforethey are prepared. But if they find their project has miscarried theyreturn home and for want of enemies engage in what I call a civilwar among themselves.That in some fields of his country there are certain shining stones ofseveral colours whereof the Yahoos are violently fond and when partof these stones is fixed in the earth as it sometimes happens theywill dig with their claws for whole days to get them out then carrythem away and hide them by heaps in their kennels but still lookinground with great caution for fear their comrades should find out theirtreasure. My master said he could never discover the reason of thisunnatural appetite or how these stones could be of any use to aYahoo but now he believed it might proceed from the same principleof avarice which I had ascribed to mankind. That he had once by way ofexperiment privately removed a heap of these stones from the placewhere one of his Yahoos had buried it whereupon the sordid animalmissing his treasure by his loud lamenting brought the whole herd tothe place there miserably howled then fell to biting and tearing therest began to pine away would neither eat nor sleep nor work tillhe ordered a servant privately to convey the stones into the same holeand hide them as before which when his Yahoo had found hepresently recovered his spirits and good humour but took good care toremove them to a better hiding place and has ever since been a veryserviceable brute.My master further assured me which I also observed myself that inthe fields where the shining stones abound the fiercest and mostfrequent battles are fought occasioned by perpetual inroads of theneighbouring Yahoos.He said it was common when two Yahoos discovered such a stone in afield and were contending which of them should be the proprietor athird would take the advantage and carry it away from them bothwhich my master would needs contend to have some kind of resemblancewith our suits at law wherein I thought it for our credit not toundeceive him since the decision he mentioned was much more equitablethan many decrees among us because the plaintiff and defendant therelost nothing beside the stone they contended for whereas our courts ofequity would never have dismissed the cause while either of them hadany thing left.My master continuing his discourse said there was nothing thatrendered the Yahoos more odious than their undistinguishing appetiteto devour every thing that came in their way whether herbs rootsberries the corrupted flesh of animals or all mingled together andit was peculiar in their temper that they were fonder of what theycould get by rapine or stealth at a greater distance than much betterfood provided for them at home. If their prey held out they would eattill they were ready to burst after which nature had pointed out tothem a certain root that gave them a general evacuation.There was also another kind of root very juicy but somewhat rare anddifficult to be found which the Yahoos sought for with mucheagerness and would suck it with great delight it produced in themthe same effects that wine has upon us. It would make them sometimeshug and sometimes tear one another they would howl and grin andchatter and reel and tumble and then fall asleep in the mud.I did indeed observe that the Yahoos were the only animals in thiscountry subject to any diseases which however were much fewer thanhorses have among us and contracted not by any illtreatment theymeet with but by the nastiness and greediness of that sordid brute.Neither has their language any more than a general appellation forthose maladies which is borrowed from the name of the beast andcalled hneayahoo or Yahoos evil and the cure prescribed is amixture of their own dung and urine forcibly put down the Yahoosthroat. This I have since often known to have been taken with successand do here freely recommend it to my countrymen for the public goodas an admirable specific against all diseases produced by repletion.As to learning government arts manufactures and the like mymaster confessed he could find little or no resemblance between theYahoos of that country and those in ours for he only meant toobserve what parity there was in our natures. He had heard indeedsome curious Houyhnhnms observe that in most herds there was a sortof ruling Yahoo as among us there is generally some leading orprincipal stag in a park who was always more deformed in body andmischievous in disposition than any of the rest that this leader hadusually a favourite as like himself as he could get whose employmentwas to lick his masters feet and posteriors and drive the femaleYahoos to his kennel for which he was now and then rewarded with apiece of asss flesh. This favourite is hated by the whole herd andtherefore to protect himself keeps always near the person of hisleader. He usually continues in office till a worse can be found butthe very moment he is discarded his successor at the head of all theYahoos in that district young and old male and female come in abody and discharge their excrements upon him from head to foot. Buthow far this might be applicable to our courts and favourites andministers of state my master said I could best determine.I durst make no return to this malicious insinuation which debasedhuman understanding below the sagacity of a common hound who hasjudgment enough to distinguish and follow the cry of the ablest dog inthe pack without being ever mistaken.My master told me there were some qualities remarkable in theYahoos which he had not observed me to mention or at least veryslightly in the accounts I had given of humankind. He said thoseanimals like other brutes had their females in common but in thisthey differed that the she Yahoo would admit the males while she waspregnant and that the hes would quarrel and fight with the females asfiercely as with each other both which practices were such degrees ofinfamous brutality as no other sensitive creature ever arrived at.Another thing he wondered at in the Yahoos was their strangedisposition to nastiness and dirt whereas there appears to be anatural love of cleanliness in all other animals. As to the two formeraccusations I was glad to let them pass without any reply because Ihad not a word to offer upon them in defence of my species whichotherwise I certainly had done from my own inclinations. But I couldhave easily vindicated humankind from the imputation of singularityupon the last article if there had been any swine in that country asunluckily for me there were not which although it may be a sweeterquadruped than a Yahoo cannot I humbly conceive in justicepretend to more cleanliness and so his honour himself must have ownedif he had seen their filthy way of feeding and their custom ofwallowing and sleeping in the mud.My master likewise mentioned another quality which his servants haddiscovered in several Yahoos and to him was wholly unaccountable. Hesaid a fancy would sometimes take a Yahoo to retire into a cornerto lie down and howl and groan and spurn away all that came nearhim although he were young and fat wanted neither food nor water nordid the servant imagine what could possibly ail him. And the onlyremedy they found was to set him to hard work after which he wouldinfallibly come to himself. To this I was silent out of partiality tomy own kind yet here I could plainly discover the true seeds ofspleen which only seizes on the lazy the luxurious and the richwho if they were forced to undergo the same regimen I would undertakefor the cure.His honour had further observed that a female Yahoo would oftenstand behind a bank or a bush to gaze on the young males passing byand then appear and hide using many antic gestures and grimaces atwhich time it was observed that she had a most offensive smell andwhen any of the males advanced would slowly retire looking oftenback and with a counterfeit show of fear run off into some convenientplace where she knew the male would follow her.At other times if a female stranger came among them three or four ofher own sex would get about her and stare and chatter and grin andsmell her all over and then turn off with gestures that seemed toexpress contempt and disdain.Perhaps my master might refine a little in these speculations which hehad drawn from what he observed himself or had been told him byothers however I could not reflect without some amazement and muchsorrow that the rudiments of lewdness coquetry censure and scandalshould have place by instinct in womankind.I expected every moment that my master would accuse the Yahoos ofthose unnatural appetites in both sexes so common among us. Butnature it seems has not been so expert a schoolmistress and thesepoliter pleasures are entirely the productions of art and reason on ourside of the globe.CHAPTER VIII.The author relates several particulars of the Yahoos. The greatvirtues of the Houyhnhnms. The education and exercise of their youth.Their general assembly.As I ought to have understood human nature much better than I supposedit possible for my master to do so it was easy to apply the characterhe gave of the Yahoos to myself and my countrymen and I believed Icould yet make further discoveries from my own observation. Itherefore often begged his honour to let me go among the herds ofYahoos in the neighbourhood to which he always very graciouslyconsented being perfectly convinced that the hatred I bore thesebrutes would never suffer me to be corrupted by them and his honourordered one of his servants a strong sorrel nag very honest andgoodnatured to be my guard without whose protection I durst notundertake such adventures. For I have already told the reader how muchI was pestered by these odious animals upon my first arrival and Iafterwards failed very narrowly three or four times of falling intotheir clutches when I happened to stray at any distance without myhanger. And I have reason to believe they had some imagination that Iwas of their own species which I often assisted myself by stripping upmy sleeves and showing my naked arms and breast in their sight whenmy protector was with me. At which times they would approach as near asthey durst and imitate my actions after the manner of monkeys butever with great signs of hatred as a tame jackdaw with cap andstockings is always persecuted by the wild ones when he happens to begot among them.They are prodigiously nimble from their infancy. However I once caughta young male of three years old and endeavoured by all marks oftenderness to make it quiet but the little imp fell a squalling andscratching and biting with such violence that I was forced to let itgo and it was high time for a whole troop of old ones came about usat the noise but finding the cub was safe for away it ran and mysorrel nag being by they durst not venture near us. I observed theyoung animals flesh to smell very rank and the stink was somewhatbetween a weasel and a fox but much more disagreeable. I forgotanother circumstance and perhaps I might have the readers pardon ifit were wholly omitted that while I held the odious vermin in myhands it voided its filthy excrements of a yellow liquid substance allover my clothes but by good fortune there was a small brook hard bywhere I washed myself as clean as I could although I durst not comeinto my masters presence until I were sufficiently aired.By what I could discover the Yahoos appear to be the mostunteachable of all animals their capacity never reaching higher thanto draw or carry burdens. Yet I am of opinion this defect ariseschiefly from a perverse restive disposition for they are cunningmalicious treacherous and revengeful. They are strong and hardy butof a cowardly spirit and by consequence insolent abject and cruel.It is observed that the red haired of both sexes are more libidinousand mischievous than the rest whom yet they much exceed in strengthand activity.The Houyhnhnms keep the Yahoos for present use in huts not far fromthe house but the rest are sent abroad to certain fields where theydig up roots eat several kinds of herbs and search about for carrionor sometimes catch weasels and luhimuhs a sort of wild rat whichthey greedily devour. Nature has taught them to dig deep holes withtheir nails on the side of a rising ground wherein they lie bythemselves only the kennels of the females are larger sufficient tohold two or three cubs.They swim from their infancy like frogs and are able to continue longunder water where they often take fish which the females carry hometo their young. And upon this occasion I hope the reader will pardonmy relating an odd adventure.Being one day abroad with my protector the sorrel nag and the weatherexceeding hot I entreated him to let me bathe in a river that wasnear. He consented and I immediately stripped myself stark naked andwent down softly into the stream. It happened that a young femaleYahoo standing behind a bank saw the whole proceeding and inflamedby desire as the nag and I conjectured came running with all speedand leaped into the water within five yards of the place where Ibathed. I was never in my life so terribly frightened. The nag wasgrazing at some distance not suspecting any harm. She embraced meafter a most fulsome manner. I roared as loud as I could and the nagcame galloping towards me whereupon she quitted her grasp with theutmost reluctancy and leaped upon the opposite bank where she stoodgazing and howling all the time I was putting on my clothes.This was a matter of diversion to my master and his family as well asof mortification to myself. For now I could no longer deny that I was areal Yahoo in every limb and feature since the females had a naturalpropensity to me as one of their own species. Neither was the hair ofthis brute of a red colour which might have been some excuse for anappetite a little irregular but black as a sloe and her countenancedid not make an appearance altogether so hideous as the rest of herkind for I think she could not be above eleven years old.Having lived three years in this country the reader I suppose willexpect that I should like other travellers give him some account ofthe manners and customs of its inhabitants which it was indeed myprincipal study to learn.As these noble Houyhnhnms are endowed by nature with a generaldisposition to all virtues and have no conceptions or ideas of what isevil in a rational creature so their grand maxim is to cultivatereason and to be wholly governed by it. Neither is reason among them apoint problematical as with us where men can argue with plausibilityon both sides of the question but strikes you with immediateconviction as it must needs do where it is not mingled obscured ordiscoloured by passion and interest. I remember it was with extremedifficulty that I could bring my master to understand the meaning ofthe word opinion or how a point could be disputable because reasontaught us to affirm or deny only where we are certain and beyond ourknowledge we cannot do either. So that controversies wranglingsdisputes and positiveness in false or dubious propositions are evilsunknown among the Houyhnhnms. In the like manner when I used toexplain to him our several systems of natural philosophy he wouldlaugh that a creature pretending to reason should value itself uponthe knowledge of other peoples conjectures and in things where thatknowledge if it were certain could be of no use. Wherein he agreedentirely with the sentiments of Socrates as Plato delivers them whichI mention as the highest honour I can do that prince of philosophers. Ihave often since reflected what destruction such doctrine would makein the libraries of Europe and how many paths of fame would be thenshut up in the learned world.Friendship and benevolence are the two principal virtues among theHouyhnhnms and these not confined to particular objects butuniversal to the whole race for a stranger from the remotest part isequally treated with the nearest neighbour and wherever he goes looksupon himself as at home. They preserve decency and civility in thehighest degrees but are altogether ignorant of ceremony. They have nofondness for their colts or foals but the care they take in educatingthem proceeds entirely from the dictates of reason. And I observed mymaster to show the same affection to his neighbours issue that he hadfor his own. They will have it that nature teaches them to love thewhole species and it is reason only that makes a distinction ofpersons where there is a superior degree of virtue.When the matron Houyhnhnms have produced one of each sex they nolonger accompany with their consorts except they lose one of theirissue by some casualty which very seldom happens but in such a casethey meet again or when the like accident befalls a person whose wifeis past bearing some other couple bestow on him one of their owncolts and then go together again until the mother is pregnant. Thiscaution is necessary to prevent the country from being overburdenedwith numbers. But the race of inferior Houyhnhnms bred up to beservants is not so strictly limited upon this article these areallowed to produce three of each sex to be domestics in the noblefamilies.In their marriages they are exactly careful to choose such colours aswill not make any disagreeable mixture in the breed. Strength ischiefly valued in the male and comeliness in the female not upon theaccount of love but to preserve the race from degenerating for wherea female happens to excel in strength a consort is chosen with regardto comeliness.Courtship love presents jointures settlements have no place intheir thoughts or terms whereby to express them in their language. Theyoung couple meet and are joined merely because it is thedetermination of their parents and friends it is what they see doneevery day and they look upon it as one of the necessary actions of areasonable being. But the violation of marriage or any otherunchastity was never heard of and the married pair pass their liveswith the same friendship and mutual benevolence that they bear to allothers of the same species who come in their way without jealousyfondness quarrelling or discontent.In educating the youth of both sexes their method is admirable andhighly deserves our imitation. These are not suffered to taste a grainof oats except upon certain days till eighteen years old nor milkbut very rarely and in summer they graze two hours in the morning andas many in the evening which their parents likewise observe but theservants are not allowed above half that time and a great part oftheir grass is brought home which they eat at the most convenienthours when they can be best spared from work.Temperance industry exercise and cleanliness are the lessonsequally enjoined to the young ones of both sexes and my master thoughtit monstrous in us to give the females a different kind of educationfrom the males except in some articles of domestic managementwhereby as he truly observed one half of our natives were good fornothing but bringing children into the world and to trust the care ofour children to such useless animals he said was yet a greaterinstance of brutality.But the Houyhnhnms train up their youth to strength speed andhardiness by exercising them in running races up and down steep hillsand over hard stony grounds and when they are all in a sweat they areordered to leap over head and ears into a pond or river. Four times ayear the youth of a certain district meet to show their proficiency inrunning and leaping and other feats of strength and agility where thevictor is rewarded with a song in his or her praise. On this festivalthe servants drive a herd of Yahoos into the field laden with hayand oats and milk for a repast to the Houyhnhnms after whichthese brutes are immediately driven back again for fear of beingnoisome to the assembly.Every fourth year at the vernal equinox there is a representativecouncil of the whole nation which meets in a plain about twenty milesfrom our house and continues about five or six days. Here they inquireinto the state and condition of the several districts whether theyabound or be deficient in hay or oats or cows or Yahoos andwherever there is any want which is but seldom it is immediatelysupplied by unanimous consent and contribution. Here likewise theregulation of children is settled as for instance if a Houyhnhnmhas two males he changes one of them with another that has twofemales and when a child has been lost by any casualty where themother is past breeding it is determined what family in the districtshall breed another to supply the loss.CHAPTER IX.A grand debate at the general assembly of the Houyhnhnms and how itwas determined. The learning of the Houyhnhnms. Their buildings.Their manner of burials. The defectiveness of their language.One of these grand assemblies was held in my time about three monthsbefore my departure whither my master went as the representative ofour district. In this council was resumed their old debate and indeedthe only debate that ever happened in their country whereof my masterafter his return gave me a very particular account.The question to be debated was whether the Yahoos should beexterminated from the face of the earth One of the members for theaffirmative offered several arguments of great strength and weightalleging that as the Yahoos were the most filthy noisome anddeformed animals which nature ever produced so they were the mostrestive and indocible mischievous and malicious they would privatelysuck the teats of the Houyhnhnms cows kill and devour their catstrample down their oats and grass if they were not continuallywatched and commit a thousand other extravagancies. He took notice ofa general tradition that Yahoos had not been always in theircountry but that many ages ago two of these brutes appeared togetherupon a mountain whether produced by the heat of the sun upon corruptedmud and slime or from the ooze and froth of the sea was never knownthat these Yahoos engendered and their brood in a short time grewso numerous as to overrun and infest the whole nation that theHouyhnhnms to get rid of this evil made a general hunting and atlast enclosed the whole herd and destroying the elder everyHouyhnhnm kept two young ones in a kennel and brought them to such adegree of tameness as an animal so savage by nature can be capableof acquiring using them for draught and carriage that there seemed tobe much truth in this tradition and that those creatures could not beyinhniamshy or aborigines of the land because of the violenthatred the Houyhnhnms as well as all other animals bore themwhich although their evil disposition sufficiently deserved couldnever have arrived at so high a degree if they had been aboriginesor else they would have long since been rooted out that theinhabitants taking a fancy to use the service of the Yahoos hadvery imprudently neglected to cultivate the breed of asses which area comely animal easily kept more tame and orderly without anyoffensive smell strong enough for labour although they yield to theother in agility of body and if their braying be no agreeable soundit is far preferable to the horrible howlings of the Yahoos.Several others declared their sentiments to the same purpose when mymaster proposed an expedient to the assembly whereof he had indeedborrowed the hint from me. He approved of the tradition mentioned bythe honourable member who spoke before and affirmed that the twoYahoos said to be seen first among them had been driven thither overthe sea that coming to land and being forsaken by their companionsthey retired to the mountains and degenerating by degrees became inprocess of time much more savage than those of their own species in thecountry whence these two originals came. The reason of this assertionwas that he had now in his possession a certain wonderful Yahoomeaning myself which most of them had heard of and many of them hadseen. He then related to them how he first found me that my body wasall covered with an artificial composure of the skins and hairs ofother animals that I spoke in a language of my own and had thoroughlylearned theirs that I had related to him the accidents which broughtme thither that when he saw me without my covering I was an exactYahoo in every part only of a whiter colour less hairy and withshorter claws. He added how I had endeavoured to persuade him that inmy own and other countries the Yahoos acted as the governingrational animal and held the Houyhnhnms in servitude that heobserved in me all the qualities of a Yahoo only a little morecivilized by some tincture of reason which however was in a degreeas far inferior to the Houyhnhnm race as the Yahoos of theircountry were to me that among other things I mentioned a custom wehad of castrating Houyhnhnms when they were young in order to renderthem tame that the operation was easy and safe that it was no shameto learn wisdom from brutes as industry is taught by the ant andbuilding by the swallow for so I translate the word lyhannhalthough it be a much larger fowl that this invention might bepractised upon the younger Yahoos here which besides rendering themtractable and fitter for use would in an age put an end to the wholespecies without destroying life that in the mean time theHouyhnhnms should be exhorted to cultivate the breed of asses whichas they are in all respects more valuable brutes so they have thisadvantage to be fit for service at five years old which the othersare not till twelve.This was all my master thought fit to tell me at that time of whatpassed in the grand council. But he was pleased to conceal oneparticular which related personally to myself whereof I soon felt theunhappy effect as the reader will know in its proper place and whenceI date all the succeeding misfortunes of my life.The Houyhnhnms have no letters and consequently their knowledge isall traditional. But there happening few events of any moment among apeople so well united naturally disposed to every virtue whollygoverned by reason and cut off from all commerce with other nationsthe historical part is easily preserved without burdening theirmemories. I have already observed that they are subject to no diseasesand therefore can have no need of physicians. However they haveexcellent medicines composed of herbs to cure accidental bruises andcuts in the pastern or frog of the foot by sharp stones as well asother maims and hurts in the several parts of the body.They calculate the year by the revolution of the sun and moon but useno subdivisions into weeks. They are well enough acquainted with themotions of those two luminaries and understand the nature of eclipsesand this is the utmost progress of their astronomy.In poetry they must be allowed to excel all other mortals wherein thejustness of their similes and the minuteness as well as exactness oftheir descriptions are indeed inimitable. Their verses abound verymuch in both of these and usually contain either some exalted notionsof friendship and benevolence or the praises of those who were victorsin races and other bodily exercises. Their buildings although veryrude and simple are not inconvenient but well contrived to defendthem from all injuries of cold and heat. They have a kind of treewhich at forty years old loosens in the root and falls with the firststorm it grows very straight and being pointed like stakes with asharp stone for the Houyhnhnms know not the use of iron they stickthem erect in the ground about ten inches asunder and then weave inoat straw or sometimes wattles between them. The roof is made afterthe same manner and so are the doors.The Houyhnhnms use the hollow part between the pastern and the hoofof their forefoot as we do our hands and this with greater dexteritythan I could at first imagine. I have seen a white mare of our familythread a needle which I lent her on purpose with that joint. Theymilk their cows reap their oats and do all the work which requireshands in the same manner. They have a kind of hard flints which bygrinding against other stones they form into instruments that serveinstead of wedges axes and hammers. With tools made of these flintsthey likewise cut their hay and reap their oats which there grownaturally in several fields the Yahoos draw home the sheaves incarriages and the servants tread them in certain covered huts to getout the grain which is kept in stores. They make a rude kind ofearthen and wooden vessels and bake the former in the sun.If they can avoid casualties they die only of old age and are buriedin the obscurest places that can be found their friends and relationsexpressing neither joy nor grief at their departure nor does the dyingperson discover the least regret that he is leaving the world any morethan if he were upon returning home from a visit to one of hisneighbours. I remember my master having once made an appointment with afriend and his family to come to his house upon some affair ofimportance on the day fixed the mistress and her two children camevery late she made two excuses first for her husband who as shesaid happened that very morning to shnuwnh. The word is stronglyexpressive in their language but not easily rendered into English itsignifies to retire to his first mother. Her excuse for not comingsooner was that her husband dying late in the morning she was a goodwhile consulting her servants about a convenient place where his bodyshould be laid and I observed she behaved herself at our house ascheerfully as the rest. She died about three months after.They live generally to seventy or seventyfive years very seldom tofourscore. Some weeks before their death they feel a gradual decaybut without pain. During this time they are much visited by theirfriends because they cannot go abroad with their usual ease andsatisfaction. However about ten days before their death which theyseldom fail in computing they return the visits that have been madethem by those who are nearest in the neighbourhood being carried in aconvenient sledge drawn by Yahoos which vehicle they use not onlyupon this occasion but when they grow old upon long journeys or whenthey are lamed by any accident and therefore when the dyingHouyhnhnms return those visits they take a solemn leave of theirfriends as if they were going to some remote part of the countrywhere they designed to pass the rest of their lives.I know not whether it may be worth observing that the Houyhnhnmshave no word in their language to express any thing that is evilexcept what they borrow from the deformities or ill qualities of theYahoos. Thus they denote the folly of a servant an omission of achild a stone that cuts their feet a continuance of foul orunseasonable weather and the like by adding to each the epithet ofYahoo. For instance hhnm Yahoo whnaholm Yahoo ynlhmndwihlmaYahoo and an illcontrived house ynholmhnmrohlnw Yahoo.I could with great pleasure enlarge further upon the manners andvirtues of this excellent people but intending in a short time topublish a volume by itself expressly upon that subject I refer thereader thither and in the mean time proceed to relate my own sadcatastrophe.CHAPTER X.The authors economy and happy life among the Houyhnhnms. His greatimprovement in virtue by conversing with them. Their conversations. Theauthor has notice given him by his master that he must depart from thecountry. He falls into a swoon for grief but submits. He contrives andfinishes a canoe by the help of a fellowservant and puts to sea at aventure.I had settled my little economy to my own hearts content. My masterhad ordered a room to be made for me after their manner about sixyards from the house the sides and floors of which I plastered withclay and covered with rushmats of my own contriving. I had beatenhemp which there grows wild and made of it a sort of ticking this Ifilled with the feathers of several birds I had taken with springesmade of Yahoos hairs and were excellent food. I had worked twochairs with my knife the sorrel nag helping me in the grosser and morelaborious part. When my clothes were worn to rags I made myself otherswith the skins of rabbits and of a certain beautiful animal about thesame size called nnuhnoh the skin of which is covered with a finedown. Of these I also made very tolerable stockings. I soled my shoeswith wood which I cut from a tree and fitted to the upperleatherand when this was worn out I supplied it with the skins of Yahoosdried in the sun. I often got honey out of hollow trees which Imingled with water or ate with my bread. No man could more verify thetruth of these two maxims That nature is very easily satisfied andThat necessity is the mother of invention. I enjoyed perfect healthof body and tranquillity of mind I did not feel the treachery orinconstancy of a friend nor the injuries of a secret or open enemy. Ihad no occasion of bribing flattering or pimping to procure thefavour of any great man or of his minion I wanted no fence againstfraud or oppression here was neither physician to destroy my body norlawyer to ruin my fortune no informer to watch my words and actionsor forge accusations against me for hire here were no giberscensurers backbiters pickpockets highwaymen housebreakersattorneys bawds buffoons gamesters politicians wits spleneticstedious talkers controvertists ravishers murderers robbersvirtuosos no leaders or followers of party and faction noencouragers to vice by seducement or examples no dungeon axesgibbets whippingposts or pillories no cheating shopkeepers ormechanics no pride vanity or affectation no fops bulliesdrunkards strolling whores or poxes no ranting lewd expensivewives no stupid proud pedants no importunate overbearingquarrelsome noisy roaring empty conceited swearing companions noscoundrels raised from the dust upon the merit of their vices ornobility thrown into it on account of their virtues no lordsfiddlers judges or dancingmasters.I had the favour of being admitted to several Houyhnhnms who came tovisit or dine with my master where his honour graciously suffered meto wait in the room and listen to their discourse. Both he and hiscompany would often descend to ask me questions and receive myanswers. I had also sometimes the honour of attending my master in hisvisits to others. I never presumed to speak except in answer to aquestion and then I did it with inward regret because it was a lossof so much time for improving myself but I was infinitely delightedwith the station of an humble auditor in such conversations wherenothing passed but what was useful expressed in the fewest and mostsignificant words where as I have already said the greatest decencywas observed without the least degree of ceremony where no personspoke without being pleased himself and pleasing his companions wherethere was no interruption tediousness heat or difference ofsentiments. They have a notion that when people are met together ashort silence does much improve conversation this I found to be truefor during those little intermissions of talk new ideas would arise intheir minds which very much enlivened the discourse. Their subjectsare generally on friendship and benevolence on order and economysometimes upon the visible operations of nature or ancient traditionsupon the bounds and limits of virtue upon the unerring rules ofreason or upon some determinations to be taken at the next greatassembly and often upon the various excellences of poetry. I may addwithout vanity that my presence often gave them sufficient matter fordiscourse because it afforded my master an occasion of letting hisfriends into the history of me and my country upon which they were allpleased to descant in a manner not very advantageous to humankind andfor that reason I shall not repeat what they said only I may beallowed to observe that his honour to my great admiration appearedto understand the nature of Yahoos much better than myself. He wentthrough all our vices and follies and discovered many which I hadnever mentioned to him by only supposing what qualities a Yahoo oftheir country with a small proportion of reason might be capable ofexerting and concluded with too much probability how vile as wellas miserable such a creature must be.I freely confess that all the little knowledge I have of any valuewas acquired by the lectures I received from my master and fromhearing the discourses of him and his friends to which I should beprouder to listen than to dictate to the greatest and wisest assemblyin Europe. I admired the strength comeliness and speed of theinhabitants and such a constellation of virtues in such amiablepersons produced in me the highest veneration. At first indeed I didnot feel that natural awe which the Yahoos and all other animalsbear toward them but it grew upon me by degrees much sooner than Iimagined and was mingled with a respectful love and gratitude thatthey would condescend to distinguish me from the rest of my species.When I thought of my family my friends my countrymen or the humanrace in general I considered them as they really were Yahoos inshape and disposition perhaps a little more civilized and qualifiedwith the gift of speech but making no other use of reason than toimprove and multiply those vices whereof their brethren in this countryhad only the share that nature allotted them. When I happened to beholdthe reflection of my own form in a lake or fountain I turned away myface in horror and detestation of myself and could better endure thesight of a common Yahoo than of my own person. By conversing with theHouyhnhnms and looking upon them with delight I fell to imitatetheir gait and gesture which is now grown into a habit and my friendsoften tell me in a blunt way that I trot like a horse whichhowever I take for a great compliment. Neither shall I disown that inspeaking I am apt to fall into the voice and manner of theHouyhnhnms and hear myself ridiculed on that account without theleast mortification.In the midst of all this happiness and when I looked upon myself to befully settled for life my master sent for me one morning a littleearlier than his usual hour. I observed by his countenance that he wasin some perplexity and at a loss how to begin what he had to speak.After a short silence he told me he did not know how I would takewhat he was going to say that in the last general assembly when theaffair of the Yahoos was entered upon the representatives had takenoffence at his keeping a Yahoo meaning myself in his family morelike a Houyhnhnm than a brute animal that he was known frequently toconverse with me as if he could receive some advantage or pleasure inmy company that such a practice was not agreeable to reason or natureor a thing ever heard of before among them the assembly did thereforeexhort him either to employ me like the rest of my species or commandme to swim back to the place whence I came that the first of theseexpedients was utterly rejected by all the Houyhnhnms who had everseen me at his house or their own for they alleged that because I hadsome rudiments of reason added to the natural pravity of thoseanimals it was to be feared I might be able to seduce them into thewoody and mountainous parts of the country and bring them in troops bynight to destroy the Houyhnhnms cattle as being naturally of theravenous kind and averse from labour.My master added that he was daily pressed by the Houyhnhnms of theneighbourhood to have the assemblys exhortation executed which hecould not put off much longer. He doubted it would be impossible for meto swim to another country and therefore wished I would contrive somesort of vehicle resembling those I had described to him that mightcarry me on the sea in which work I should have the assistance of hisown servants as well as those of his neighbours. He concluded thatfor his own part he could have been content to keep me in his serviceas long as I lived because he found I had cured myself of some badhabits and dispositions by endeavouring as far as my inferior naturewas capable to imitate the Houyhnhnms.I should here observe to the reader that a decree of the generalassembly in this country is expressed by the word hnhloayn whichsignifies an exhortation as near as I can render it for they have noconception how a rational creature can be compelled but only advisedor exhorted because no person can disobey reason without giving uphis claim to be a rational creature.I was struck with the utmost grief and despair at my mastersdiscourse and being unable to support the agonies I was under I fellinto a swoon at his feet. When I came to myself he told me that heconcluded I had been dead for these people are subject to no suchimbecilities of nature. I answered in a faint voice that death wouldhave been too great a happiness that although I could not blame theassemblys exhortation or the urgency of his friends yet in my weakand corrupt judgment I thought it might consist with reason to havebeen less rigorous that I could not swim a league and probably thenearest land to theirs might be distant above a hundred that manymaterials necessary for making a small vessel to carry me off werewholly wanting in this country which however I would attempt inobedience and gratitude to his honour although I concluded the thingto be impossible and therefore looked on myself as already devoted todestruction that the certain prospect of an unnatural death was theleast of my evils for supposing I should escape with life by somestrange adventure how could I think with temper of passing my daysamong Yahoos and relapsing into my old corruptions for want ofexamples to lead and keep me within the paths of virtue That I knewtoo well upon what solid reasons all the determinations of the wiseHouyhnhnms were founded not to be shaken by arguments of mine amiserable Yahoo and therefore after presenting him with my humblethanks for the offer of his servants assistance in making a vesseland desiring a reasonable time for so difficult a work I told him Iwould endeavour to preserve a wretched being and if ever I returned toEngland was not without hopes of being useful to my own species bycelebrating the praises of the renowned Houyhnhnms and proposingtheir virtues to the imitation of mankind.My master in a few words made me a very gracious reply allowed methe space of two months to finish my boat and ordered the sorrel nagmy fellowservant for so at this distance I may presume to callhim to follow my instruction because I told my master that hishelp would be sufficient and I knew he had a tenderness for me.In his company my first business was to go to that part of the coastwhere my rebellious crew had ordered me to be set on shore. I got upona height and looking on every side into the sea fancied I saw a smallisland toward the northeast. I took out my pocket glass and couldthen clearly distinguish it above five leagues off as I computed butit appeared to the sorrel nag to be only a blue cloud for as he had noconception of any country beside his own so he could not be as expertin distinguishing remote objects at sea as we who so much converse inthat element.After I had discovered this island I considered no further butresolved it should if possible be the first place of my banishmentleaving the consequence to fortune.I returned home and consulting with the sorrel nag we went into acopse at some distance where I with my knife and he with a sharpflint fastened very artificially after their manner to a woodenhandle cut down several oak wattles about the thickness of awalkingstaff and some larger pieces. But I shall not trouble thereader with a particular description of my own mechanics let itsuffice to say that in six weeks time with the help of the sorrel nagwho performed the parts that required most labour I finished a sort ofIndian canoe but much larger covering it with the skins of Yahooswell stitched together with hempen threads of my own making. My sailwas likewise composed of the skins of the same animal but I made useof the youngest I could get the older being too tough and thick and Ilikewise provided myself with four paddles. I laid in a stock of boiledflesh of rabbits and fowls and took with me two vessels one filledwith milk and the other with water.I tried my canoe in a large pond near my masters house and thencorrected in it what was amiss stopping all the chinks with Yahoostallow till I found it staunch and able to bear me and my freightand when it was as complete as I could possibly make it I had itdrawn on a carriage very gently by Yahoos to the seaside under theconduct of the sorrel nag and another servant.When all was ready and the day came for my departure I took leave ofmy master and lady and the whole family my eyes flowing with tearsand my heart quite sunk with grief. But his honour out of curiosityand perhaps if I may speak without vanity partly out of kindnesswas determined to see me in my canoe and got several of hisneighbouring friends to accompany him. I was forced to wait above anhour for the tide and then observing the wind very fortunately bearingtoward the island to which I intended to steer my course I took asecond leave of my master but as I was going to prostrate myself tokiss his hoof he did me the honour to raise it gently to my mouth. Iam not ignorant how much I have been censured for mentioning this lastparticular. Detractors are pleased to think it improbable that soillustrious a person should descend to give so great a mark ofdistinction to a creature so inferior as I. Neither have I forgottenhow apt some travellers are to boast of extraordinary favours they havereceived. But if these censurers were better acquainted with the nobleand courteous disposition of the Houyhnhnms they would soon changetheir opinion.I paid my respects to the rest of the Houyhnhnms in his honourscompany then getting into my canoe I pushed off from shore.CHAPTER XI.The authors dangerous voyage. He arrives at New Holland hoping tosettle there. Is wounded with an arrow by one of the natives. Is seizedand carried by force into a Portuguese ship. The great civilities ofthe captain. The author arrives at England.I began this desperate voyage on February at nine oclockin the morning. The wind was very favourable however I made use atfirst only of my paddles but considering I should soon be weary andthat the wind might chop about I ventured to set up my little sailand thus with the help of the tide I went at the rate of a league anda half an hour as near as I could guess. My master and his friendscontinued on the shore till I was almost out of sight and I oftenheard the sorrel nag who always loved me crying out Hnuy illanyha majah Yahoo Take care of thyself gentle Yahoo.My design was if possible to discover some small island uninhabitedyet sufficient by my labour to furnish me with the necessaries oflife which I would have thought a greater happiness than to be firstminister in the politest court of Europe so horrible was the idea Iconceived of returning to live in the society and under the governmentof Yahoos. For in such a solitude as I desired I could at leastenjoy my own thoughts and reflect with delight on the virtues of thoseinimitable Houyhnhnms without an opportunity of degenerating intothe vices and corruptions of my own species.The reader may remember what I related when my crew conspired againstme and confined me to my cabin how I continued there several weekswithout knowing what course we took and when I was put ashore in thelongboat how the sailors told me with oaths whether true or falsethat they knew not in what part of the world we were. However I didthen believe us to be about degrees southward of the Cape of GoodHope or about degrees southern latitude as I gathered from somegeneral words I overheard among them being I supposed to thesoutheast in their intended voyage to Madagascar. And although thiswere little better than conjecture yet I resolved to steer my courseeastward hoping to reach the southwest coast of New Holland andperhaps some such island as I desired lying westward of it. The windwas full west and by six in the evening I computed I had gone eastwardat least eighteen leagues when I spied a very small island about halfa league off which I soon reached. It was nothing but a rock with onecreek naturally arched by the force of tempests. Here I put in mycanoe and climbing a part of the rock I could plainly discover landto the east extending from south to north. I lay all night in mycanoe and repeating my voyage early in the morning I arrived in sevenhours to the southeast point of New Holland. This confirmed me in theopinion I have long entertained that the maps and charts place thiscountry at least three degrees more to the east than it really iswhich thought I communicated many years ago to my worthy friend Mr.Herman Moll and gave him my reasons for it although he has ratherchosen to follow other authors.I saw no inhabitants in the place where I landed and being unarmed Iwas afraid of venturing far into the country. I found some shellfish onthe shore and ate them raw not daring to kindle a fire for fear ofbeing discovered by the natives. I continued three days feeding onoysters and limpets to save my own provisions and I fortunately founda brook of excellent water which gave me great relief.On the fourth day venturing out early a little too far I saw twentyor thirty natives upon a height not above five hundred yards from me.They were stark naked men women and children round a fire as Icould discover by the smoke. One of them spied me and gave notice tothe rest five of them advanced toward me leaving the women andchildren at the fire. I made what haste I could to the shore andgetting into my canoe shoved off the savages observing me retreatran after me and before I could get far enough into the seadischarged an arrow which wounded me deeply on the inside of my leftknee I shall carry the mark to my grave. I apprehended the arrow mightbe poisoned and paddling out of the reach of their darts being a calmday I made a shift to suck the wound and dress it as well as Icould.I was at a loss what to do for I durst not return to the samelandingplace but stood to the north and was forced to paddle forthe wind though very gentle was against me blowing northwest. As Iwas looking about for a secure landingplace I saw a sail to thenorthnortheast which appearing every minute more visible I was insome doubt whether I should wait for them or not but at last mydetestation of the Yahoo race prevailed and turning my canoe Isailed and paddled together to the south and got into the same creekwhence I set out in the morning choosing rather to trust myself amongthese barbarians than live with European Yahoos. I drew up my canoeas close as I could to the shore and hid myself behind a stone by thelittle brook which as I have already said was excellent water.The ship came within half a league of this creek and sent herlongboat with vessels to take in fresh water for the place it seemswas very well known but I did not observe it till the boat wasalmost on shore and it was too late to seek another hidingplace. Theseamen at their landing observed my canoe and rummaging it all overeasily conjectured that the owner could not be far off. Four of themwell armed searched every cranny and lurkinghole till at last theyfound me flat on my face behind the stone. They gazed awhile inadmiration at my strange uncouth dress my coat made of skins mywoodensoled shoes and my furred stockings whence however theyconcluded I was not a native of the place who all go naked. One ofthe seamen in Portuguese bid me rise and asked who I was. Iunderstood that language very well and getting upon my feet said Iwas a poor Yahoo banished from the Houyhnhnms and desired theywould please to let me depart. They admired to hear me answer them intheir own tongue and saw by my complexion I must be a European butwere at a loss to know what I meant by Yahoos and Houyhnhnms andat the same time fell alaughing at my strange tone in speaking whichresembled the neighing of a horse. I trembled all the while betwixtfear and hatred. I again desired leave to depart and was gently movingto my canoe but they laid hold of me desiring to know what countryI was of whence I came with many other questions. I told them I wasborn in England whence I came about five years ago and then theircountry and ours were at peace. I therefore hoped they would not treatme as an enemy since I meant them no harm but was a poor Yahooseeking some desolate place where to pass the remainder of hisunfortunate life.When they began to talk I thought I never heard or saw any thing moreunnatural for it appeared to me as monstrous as if a dog or a cowshould speak in England or a Yahoo in Houyhnhnmland. The honestPortuguese were equally amazed at my strange dress and the odd mannerof delivering my words which however they understood very well. Theyspoke to me with great humanity and said they were sure the captainwould carry me gratis to Lisbon whence I might return to my owncountry that two of the seamen would go back to the ship inform thecaptain of what they had seen and receive his orders in the meantime unless I would give my solemn oath not to fly they would secureme by force. I thought it best to comply with their proposal. They werevery curious to know my story but I gave them very littlesatisfaction and they all conjectured that my misfortunes had impairedmy reason. In two hours the boat which went laden with vessels ofwater returned with the captains command to fetch me on board. Ifell on my knees to preserve my liberty but all was in vain and themen having tied me with cords heaved me into the boat whence I wastaken into the ship and thence into the captains cabin.His name was Pedro de Mendez he was a very courteous and generousperson. He entreated me to give some account of myself and desired toknow what I would eat or drink said I should be used as well ashimself and spoke so many obliging things that I wondered to findsuch civilities from a Yahoo. However I remained silent and sullenI was ready to faint at the very smell of him and his men. At last Idesired something to eat out of my own canoe but he ordered me achicken and some excellent wine and then directed that I should beput to bed in a very clean cabin. I would not undress myself but layon the bedclothes and in half an hour stole out when I thought thecrew was at dinner and getting to the side of the ship was going toleap into the sea and swim for my life rather than continue amongYahoos. But one of the seamen prevented me and having informed thecaptain I was chained to my cabin.After dinner Don Pedro came to me and desired to know my reason forso desperate an attempt assured me he only meant to do me all theservice he was able and spoke so very movingly that at last Idescended to treat him like an animal which had some little portion ofreason. I gave him a very short relation of my voyage of theconspiracy against me by my own men of the country where they set meon shore and of my five years residence there. All which he lookedupon as if it were a dream or a vision whereat I took great offencefor I had quite forgot the faculty of lying so peculiar to Yahoosin all countries where they preside and consequently theirdisposition of suspecting truth in others of their own species. I askedhim whether it were the custom in his country to say the thing whichwas not I assured him I had almost forgot what he meant byfalsehood and if I had lived a thousand years in Houyhnhnmland Ishould never have heard a lie from the meanest servant that I wasaltogether indifferent whether he believed me or not but however inreturn for his favours I would give so much allowance to thecorruption of his nature as to answer any objection he would please tomake and then he might easily discover the truth.The captain a wise man after many endeavours to catch me tripping insome part of my story at last began to have a better opinion of myveracity. But he added that since I professed so inviolable anattachment to truth I must give him my word and honour to bear himcompany in this voyage without attempting any thing against my lifeor else he would continue me a prisoner till we arrived at Lisbon. Igave him the promise he required but at the same time protested thatI would suffer the greatest hardships rather than return to live amongYahoos.Our voyage passed without any considerable accident. In gratitude tothe captain I sometimes sat with him at his earnest request andstrove to conceal my antipathy against humankind although it oftenbroke out which he suffered to pass without observation. But thegreatest part of the day I confined myself to my cabin to avoid seeingany of the crew. The captain had often entreated me to strip myself ofmy savage dress and offered to lend me the best suit of clothes hehad. This I would not be prevailed on to accept abhorring to covermyself with any thing that had been on the back of a Yahoo. I onlydesired he would lend me two clean shirts which having been washedsince he wore them I believed would not so much defile me. These Ichanged every second day and washed them myself.We arrived at Lisbon Nov. . At our landing the captain forcedme to cover myself with his cloak to prevent the rabble from crowdingabout me. I was conveyed to his own house and at my earnest request heled me up to the highest room backwards. I conjured him to concealfrom all persons what I had told him of the Houyhnhnms because theleast hint of such a story would not only draw numbers of people to seeme but probably put me in danger of being imprisoned or burnt by theInquisition. The captain persuaded me to accept a suit of clothesnewly made but I would not suffer the tailor to take my measurehowever Don Pedro being almost of my size they fitted me well enough.He accoutred me with other necessaries all new which I aired fortwentyfour hours before I would use them.The captain had no wife nor above three servants none of which weresuffered to attend at meals and his whole deportment was so obligingadded to very good human understanding that I really began to toleratehis company. He gained so far upon me that I ventured to look out ofthe back window. By degrees I was brought into another room whence Ipeeped into the street but drew my head back in a fright. In a weekstime he seduced me down to the door. I found my terror graduallylessened but my hatred and contempt seemed to increase. I was at lastbold enough to walk the street in his company but kept my nose wellstopped with rue or sometimes with tobacco.In ten days Don Pedro to whom I had given some account of my domesticaffairs put it upon me as a matter of honour and conscience that Iought to return to my native country and live at home with my wife andchildren. He told me there was an English ship in the port justready to sail and he would furnish me with all things necessary. Itwould be tedious to repeat his arguments and my contradictions. Hesaid it was altogether impossible to find such a solitary island as Idesired to live in but I might command in my own house and pass mytime in a manner as recluse as I pleased.I complied at last finding I could not do better. I left Lisbon theth day of November in an English merchantman but who was the masterI never inquired. Don Pedro accompanied me to the ship and lent metwenty pounds. He took kind leave of me and embraced me at partingwhich I bore as well as I could. During this last voyage I had nocommerce with the master or any of his men but pretending I was sickkept close in my cabin. On the fifth of December we cast anchorin the Downs about nine in the morning and at three in the afternoonI got safe to my house at Rotherhith. My wife and family received me with great surprise and joy becausethey concluded me certainly dead but I must freely confess the sightof them filled me only with hatred disgust and contempt and themore by reflecting on the near alliance I had to them. For althoughsince my unfortunate exile from the Houyhnhnm country I hadcompelled myself to tolerate the sight of Yahoos and to conversewith Don Pedro de Mendez yet my memory and imagination wereperpetually filled with the virtues and ideas of those exaltedHouyhnhnms. And when I began to consider that by copulating with oneof the Yahoo species I had become a parent of more it struck me withthe utmost shame confusion and horror.As soon as I entered the house my wife took me in her arms and kissedme at which having not been used to the touch of that odious animalfor so many years I fell into a swoon for almost an hour. At the timeI am writing it is five years since my last return to England. Duringthe first year I could not endure my wife or children in my presencethe very smell of them was intolerable much less could I suffer themto eat in the same room. To this hour they dare not presume to touch mybread or drink out of the same cup neither was I ever able to let oneof them take me by the hand. The first money I laid out was to buy twoyoung stonehorses which I keep in a good stable and next to themthe groom is my greatest favourite for I feel my spirits revived bythe smell he contracts in the stable. My horses understand me tolerablywell I converse with them at least four hours every day. They arestrangers to bridle or saddle they live in great amity with me andfriendship to each other.CHAPTER XII.The authors veracity. His design in publishing this work. His censureof those travellers who swerve from the truth. The author clearshimself from any sinister ends in writing. An objection answered. Themethod of planting colonies. His native country commended. The right ofthe crown to those countries described by the author is justified. Thedifficulty of conquering them. The author takes his last leave of thereader proposes his manner of living for the future gives goodadvice and concludes.Thus gentle reader I have given thee a faithful history of my travelsfor sixteen years and above seven months wherein I have not been sostudious of ornament as of truth. I could perhaps like others haveastonished thee with strange improbable tales but I rather chose torelate plain matter of fact in the simplest manner and style becausemy principal design was to inform and not to amuse thee.It is easy for us who travel into remote countries which are seldomvisited by Englishmen or other Europeans to form descriptions ofwonderful animals both at sea and land. Whereas a travellers chief aimshould be to make men wiser and better and to improve their minds bythe bad as well as good example of what they deliver concerningforeign places.I could heartily wish a law was enacted that every traveller beforehe were permitted to publish his voyages should be obliged to makeoath before the Lord High Chancellor that all he intended to print wasabsolutely true to the best of his knowledge for then the world wouldno longer be deceived as it usually is while some writers to maketheir works pass the better upon the public impose the grossestfalsities on the unwary reader. I have perused several books of travelswith great delight in my younger days but having since gone over mostparts of the globe and been able to contradict many fabulous accountsfrom my own observation it has given me a great disgust against thispart of reading and some indignation to see the credulity of mankindso impudently abused. Therefore since my acquaintance were pleased tothink my poor endeavours might not be unacceptable to my country Iimposed on myself as a maxim never to be swerved from that I wouldstrictly adhere to truth neither indeed can I be ever under the leasttemptation to vary from it while I retain in my mind the lectures andexample of my noble master and the other illustrious Houyhnhnms ofwhom I had so long the honour to be an humble hearer.Nec si miserum Fortuna SinonemFinxit vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget.I know very well how little reputation is to be got by writings whichrequire neither genius nor learning nor indeed any other talentexcept a good memory or an exact journal. I know likewise thatwriters of travels like dictionarymakers are sunk into oblivion bythe weight and bulk of those who come last and therefore lieuppermost. And it is highly probable that such travellers who shallhereafter visit the countries described in this work of mine may bydetecting my errors if there be any and adding many new discoveriesof their own jostle me out of vogue and stand in my place making theworld forget that ever I was an author. This indeed would be too greata mortification if I wrote for fame but as my sole intention was thepublic good I cannot be altogether disappointed. For who can read ofthe virtues I have mentioned in the glorious Houyhnhnms withoutbeing ashamed of his own vices when he considers himself as thereasoning governing animal of his country I shall say nothing ofthose remote nations where Yahoos preside among which the leastcorrupted are the Brobdingnagians whose wise maxims in morality andgovernment it would be our happiness to observe. But I forbeardescanting further and rather leave the judicious reader to his ownremarks and application.I am not a little pleased that this work of mine can possibly meet withno censurers for what objections can be made against a writer whorelates only plain facts that happened in such distant countrieswhere we have not the least interest with respect either to trade ornegotiations I have carefully avoided every fault with which commonwriters of travels are often too justly charged. Besides I meddle notthe least with any party but write without passion prejudice orillwill against any man or number of men whatsoever. I write for thenoblest end to inform and instruct mankind over whom I may withoutbreach of modesty pretend to some superiority from the advantages Ireceived by conversing so long among the most accomplishedHouyhnhnms. I write without any view to profit or praise. I neversuffer a word to pass that may look like reflection or possibly givethe least offence even to those who are most ready to take it. So thatI hope I may with justice pronounce myself an author perfectlyblameless against whom the tribes of Answerers ConsiderersObservers Reflectors Detectors Remarkers will never be able to findmatter for exercising their talents.I confess it was whispered to me that I was bound in duty as asubject of England to have given in a memorial to a secretary of stateat my first coming over because whatever lands are discovered by asubject belong to the crown. But I doubt whether our conquests in thecountries I treat of would be as easy as those of Ferdinando Cortezover the naked Americans. The Lilliputians I think are hardly worththe charge of a fleet and army to reduce them and I question whetherit might be prudent or safe to attempt the Brobdingnagians orwhether an English army would be much at their ease with the FlyingIsland over their heads. The Houyhnhnms indeed appear not to be sowell prepared for war a science to which they are perfect strangersand especially against missive weapons. However supposing myself to bea minister of state I could never give my advice for invading them.Their prudence unanimity unacquaintedness with fear and their loveof their country would amply supply all defects in the military art.Imagine twenty thousand of them breaking into the midst of an Europeanarmy confounding the ranks overturning the carriages battering thewarriors faces into mummy by terrible yerks from their hinder hoofs.For they would well deserve the character given to AugustusRecalcitrat undique tutus. But instead of proposals for conqueringthat magnanimous nation I rather wish they were in a capacity ordisposition to send a sufficient number of their inhabitants forcivilizing Europe by teaching us the first principles of honourjustice truth temperance public spirit fortitude chastityfriendship benevolence and fidelity. The names of all which virtuesare still retained among us in most languages and are to be met within modern as well as ancient authors which I am able to assert frommy own small reading.But I had another reason which made me less forward to enlarge hismajestys dominions by my discoveries. To say the truth I hadconceived a few scruples with relation to the distributive justice ofprinces upon those occasions. For instance a crew of pirates aredriven by a storm they know not whither at length a boy discovers landfrom the topmast they go on shore to rob and plunder they see aharmless people are entertained with kindness they give the country anew name they take formal possession of it for their king they set upa rotten plank or a stone for a memorial they murder two or threedozen of the natives bring away a couple more by force for a samplereturn home and get their pardon. Here commences a new dominionacquired with a title by divine right. Ships are sent with the firstopportunity the natives driven out or destroyed their princestortured to discover their gold a free license given to all acts ofinhumanity and lust the earth reeking with the blood of itsinhabitants and this execrable crew of butchers employed in so piousan expedition is a modern colony sent to convert and civilize anidolatrous and barbarous peopleBut this description I confess does by no means affect the Britishnation who may be an example to the whole world for their wisdomcare and justice in planting colonies their liberal endowments forthe advancement of religion and learning their choice of devout andable pastors to propagate Christianity their caution in stocking theirprovinces with people of sober lives and conversations from this themother kingdom their strict regard to the distribution of justice insupplying the civil administration through all their colonies withofficers of the greatest abilities utter strangers to corruption andto crown all by sending the most vigilant and virtuous governors whohave no other views than the happiness of the people over whom theypreside and the honour of the king their master.But as those countries which I have described do not appear to have anydesire of being conquered and enslaved murdered or driven out bycolonies nor abound either in gold silver sugar or tobacco I didhumbly conceive they were by no means proper objects of our zeal ourvalour or our interest. However if those whom it more concerns thinkfit to be of another opinion I am ready to depose when I shall belawfully called that no European did ever visit those countries beforeme. I mean if the inhabitants ought to be believed unless a disputemay arise concerning the two Yahoos said to have been seen manyyears ago upon a mountain in Houyhnhnmland from whence the opinionis that the race of those brutes hath descended and these foranything I know may have been English which indeed I was apt tosuspect from the lineaments of their posteritys countenances althoughvery much defaced. But how far that will go to make out a title Ileave to the learned in colonylaw.But as to the formality of taking possession in my sovereigns nameit never came once into my thoughts and if it had yet as my affairsthen stood I should perhaps in point of prudence andselfpreservation have put it off to a better opportunity.Having thus answered the only objection that can ever be raised againstme as a traveller I here take a final leave of all my courteousreaders and return to enjoy my own speculations in my little garden atRedriff to apply those excellent lessons of virtue which I learnedamong the Houyhnhnms to instruct the Yahoos of my own family asfar as I shall find them docible animals to behold my figure often ina glass and thus if possible habituate myself by time to toleratethe sight of a human creature to lament the brutality to Houyhnhnmsin my own country but always treat their persons with respect for thesake of my noble master his family his friends and the wholeHouyhnhnm race whom these of ours have the honour to resemble in alltheir lineaments however their intellectuals came to degenerate.I began last week to permit my wife to sit at dinner with me at thefarthest end of a long table and to answer but with the utmostbrevity the few questions I asked her. Yet the smell of a Yahoocontinuing very offensive I always keep my nose well stopped with ruelavender or tobacco leaves. And although it be hard for a man late inlife to remove old habits I am not altogether out of hopes in sometime to suffer a neighbour Yahoo in my company without theapprehensions I am yet under of his teeth or his claws.My reconcilement to the Yahookind in general might not be sodifficult if they would be content with those vices and follies onlywhich nature has entitled them to. I am not in the least provoked atthe sight of a lawyer a pickpocket a colonel a fool a lord agamester a politician a whoremonger a physician an evidence asuborner an attorney a traitor or the like this is all according tothe due course of things but when I behold a lump of deformity anddiseases both in body and mind smitten with pride it immediatelybreaks all the measures of my patience neither shall I be ever able tocomprehend how such an animal and such a vice could tally together.The wise and virtuous Houyhnhnms who abound in all excellences thatcan adorn a rational creature have no name for this vice in theirlanguage which has no terms to express any thing that is evil exceptthose whereby they describe the detestable qualities of their Yahoosamong which they were not able to distinguish this of pride for wantof thoroughly understanding human nature as it shows itself in othercountries where that animal presides. But I who had more experiencecould plainly observe some rudiments of it among the wild Yahoos.But the Houyhnhnms who live under the government of reason are nomore proud of the good qualities they possess than I should be for notwanting a leg or an arm which no man in his wits would boast ofalthough he must be miserable without them. I dwell the longer uponthis subject from the desire I have to make the society of an EnglishYahoo by any means not insupportable and therefore I here entreatthose who have any tincture of this absurd vice that they will notpresume to come in my sight.